
                               CHAPTER I

In the late summer of that year we lived in a house in a village that
looked across the river and the plain to the mountains. In the bed of
the river there were pebbles and boulders, dry and white in the sun, and
the water was clear and swiftly moving and blue in the channels. Troops
went by the house and down the road and the dust they raised powdered
the leaves of the trees. The trunks of the trees too were dusty and the
leaves fell early that year and we saw the troops marching along the
road and the dust rising and leaves, stirred by the breeze, falling and
the soldiers marching and afterward the road bare and white except for
the leaves.

The plain was rich with crops; there were many orchards of fruit trees
and beyond the plain the mountains were brown and bare. There was
fighting in the mountains and at night we could see the flashes from the
artillery. In the dark it was like summer lightning, but the nights were
cool and there was not the feeling of a storm coming.

Sometimes in the dark we heard the troops marching under the window and
guns going past pulled by motor-tractors. There was much traffic at
night and many mules on the roads with boxes of ammunition on each side
of their pack-saddles and gray motor-trucks that carried men, and other
trucks with loads covered with canvas that moved slower in the traffic.
There were big guns too that passed in the day drawn by tractors, the
long barrels of the guns covered with green branches and green leafy
branches and vines laid over the tractors. To the north we could look
across a valley and see a forest of chestnut trees and behind it another
mountain on this side of the river. There was fighting for that mountain
too, but it was not successful, and in the fall when the rains came the
leaves all fell from the chestnut trees and the branches were bare and
the trunks black with rain. The vineyards were thin and bare-branched
too and all the country wet and brown and dead with the autumn. There
were mists over the river and clouds on the mountain and the trucks
splashed mud on the road and the troops were muddy and wet in their
capes; their rifles were wet and under their capes the two leather
cartridge-boxes on the front of the belts, gray leather boxes heavy with
the packs of clips of thin, long 6.5 mm. cartridges, bulged forward
under the capes so that the men, passing on the road, marched as though
they were six months gone with child.

There were small gray motor-cars that passed going very fast; usually
there was an officer on the seat with the driver and more officers in
the back seat. They splashed more mud than the camions even and if one
of the officers in the back was very small and sitting between two
generals, he himself so small that you could not see his face but only
the top of his cap and his narrow back, and if the car went especially
fast it was probably the King. He lived in Udine and came out in this
way nearly every day to see how things were going, and things went very
badly.

At the start of the winter came the permanent rain and with the rain
came the cholera. But it was checked and in the end only seven thousand
died of it in the army.




                               CHAPTER II

The next year there were many victories. The mountain that was beyond
the valley and the hillside where the chestnut forest grew was captured
and there were victories beyond the plain on the plateau to the south
and we crossed the river in August and lived in a house in Gorizia that
had a fountain and many thick shady trees in a walled garden and a
wistaria vine purple on the side of the house. Now the fighting was in
the next mountains beyond and was not a mile away. The town was very
nice and our house was very fine. The river ran behind us and the town
had been captured very handsomely but the mountains beyond it could not
be taken and I was very glad the Austrians seemed to want to come back
to the town some time, if the war should end, because they did not
bombard it to destroy it but only a little in a military way. People
lived on in it and there were hospitals and cafés and artillery up side
streets and two bawdy houses, one for troops and one for officers, and
with the end of the summer, the cool nights, the fighting in the
mountains beyond the town, the shell-marked iron of the railway bridge,
the smashed tunnel by the river where the fighting had been, the trees
around the square and the long avenue of trees that led to the square;
these with there being girls in the town, the King passing in his motor
car, sometimes now seeing his face and little long necked body and gray
beard like a goat’s chin tuft; all these with the sudden interiors of
houses that had lost a wall through shelling, with plaster and rubble in
their gardens and sometimes in the street, and the whole thing going
well on the Carso made the fall very different from the last fall when
we had been in the country. The war was changed too.

The forest of oak trees on the mountain beyond the town was gone. The
forest had been green in the summer when we had come into the town but
now there were the stumps and the broken trunks and the ground torn up,
and one day at the end of the fall when I was out where the oak forest
had been I saw a cloud coming over the mountain. It came very fast and
the sun went a dull yellow and then everything was gray and the sky was
covered and the cloud came on down the mountain and suddenly we were in
it and it was snow. The snow slanted across the wind, the bare ground
was covered, the stumps of trees projected, there was snow on the guns
and there were paths in the snow going back to the latrines behind
trenches.

Later, below in the town, I watched the snow falling, looking out of the
window of the bawdy house, the house for officers, where I sat with a
friend and two glasses drinking a bottle of Asti, and, looking out at
the snow falling slowly and heavily, we knew it was all over for that
year. Up the river the mountains had not been taken; none of the
mountains beyond the river had been taken. That was all left for next
year. My friend saw the priest from our mess going by in the street,
walking carefully in the slush, and pounded on the window to attract his
attention. The priest looked up. He saw us and smiled. My friend
motioned for him to come in. The priest shook his head and went on. That
night in the mess after the spaghetti course, which every one ate very
quickly and seriously, lifting the spaghetti on the fork until the loose
strands hung clear then lowering it into the mouth, or else using a
continuous lift and sucking into the mouth, helping ourselves to wine
from the grass-covered gallon flask; it swung in a metal cradle and you
pulled the neck of the flask down with the forefinger and the wine,
clear red, tannic and lovely, poured out into the glass held with the
same hand; after this course, the captain commenced picking on the
priest.

The priest was young and blushed easily and wore a uniform like the rest
of us but with a cross in dark red velvet above the left breast pocket
of his gray tunic. The captain spoke pidgin Italian for my doubtful
benefit, in order that I might understand perfectly, that nothing should
be lost.

“Priest to-day with girls,” the captain said looking at the priest and
at me. The priest smiled and blushed and shook his head. This captain
baited him often.

“Not true?” asked the captain. “To-day I see priest with girls.”

“No,” said the priest. The other officers were amused at the baiting.

“Priest not with girls,” went on the captain. “Priest never with girls,”
he explained to me. He took my glass and filled it, looking at my eyes
all the time, but not losing sight of the priest.

“Priest every night five against one.” Every one at the table laughed.
“You understand? Priest every night five against one.” He made a gesture
and laughed loudly. The priest accepted it as a joke.

“The Pope wants the Austrians to win the war,” the major said. “He loves
Franz Joseph. That’s where the money comes from. I am an atheist.”

“Did you ever read the ‘Black Pig’?” asked the lieutenant. “I will get
you a copy. It was that which shook my faith.”

“It is a filthy and vile book,” said the priest. “You do not really like
it.”

“It is very valuable,” said the lieutenant. “It tells you about those
priests. You will like it,” he said to me. I smiled at the priest and he
smiled back across the candle-light. “Don’t you read it,” he said.

“I will get it for you,” said the lieutenant.

“All thinking men are atheists,” the major said. “I do not believe in
the Free Masons however.”

“I believe in the Free Masons,” the lieutenant said. “It is a noble
organization.” Some one came in and as the door opened I could see the
snow falling.

“There will be no more offensive now that the snow has come,” I said.

“Certainly not,” said the major. “You should go on leave. You should go
to Rome, Naples, Sicily——”

“He should visit Amalfi,” said the lieutenant “I will write you cards to
my family in Amalfi. They will love you like a son.”

“He should go to Palermo.”

“He ought to go to Capri.”

“I would like you to see Abruzzi and visit my family at Capracotta,”
said the priest.

“Listen to him talk about the Abruzzi. There’s more snow there than
here. He doesn’t want to see peasants. Let him go to centres of culture
and civilization.”

“He should have fine girls. I will give you the addresses of places in
Naples. Beautiful young girls—accompanied by their mothers. Ha! Ha!
Ha!” The captain spread his hand open, the thumb up and fingers
outspread as when you make shadow pictures. There was a shadow from his
hand on the wall. He spoke again in pidgin Italian. “You go away like
this,” he pointed to the thumb, “and come back like this,” he touched
the little finger. Every one laughed.

“Look,” said the captain. He spread the hand again. Again the
candle-light made its shadows on the wall. He started with the upright
thumb and named in their order the thumb and four fingers, “soto-tenente
(the thumb), tenente (first finger), capitano (next finger), maggiore
(next to the little finger), and tenente-colonello (the little finger).
You go away soto-tenente! You come back soto-colonello!” They all
laughed. The captain was having a great success with finger games. He
looked at the priest and shouted, “Every night priest five against one!”
They all laughed again.

“You must go on leave at once,” the major said.

“I would like to go with you and show you things,” the lieutenant said.

“When you come back bring a phonograph.”

“Bring good opera disks.”

“Bring Caruso.”

“Don’t bring Caruso. He bellows.”

“Don’t you wish you could bellow like him?”

“He bellows. I say he bellows!”

“I would like you to go to Abruzzi,” the priest said. The others were
shouting. “There is good hunting. You would like the people and though
it is cold it is clear and dry. You could stay with my family. My father
is a famous hunter.”

“Come on,” said the captain. “We go whorehouse before it shuts.”

“Good-night,” I said to the priest.

“Good-night,” he said.




                              CHAPTER III

When I came back to the front we still lived in that town. There were
many more guns in the country around and the spring had come. The fields
were green and there were small green shoots on the vines, the trees
along the road had small leaves and a breeze came from the sea. I saw
the town with the hill and the old castle above it in a cup in the hills
with the mountains beyond, brown mountains with a little green on their
slopes. In the town there were more guns, there were some new hospitals,
you met British men and sometimes women, on the street, and a few more
houses had been hit by shell fire. It was warm and like the spring and I
walked down the alleyway of trees, warmed from the sun on the wall, and
found we still lived in the same house and that it all looked the same
as when I had left it. The door was open, there was a soldier sitting on
a bench outside in the sun, an ambulance was waiting by the side door
and inside the door, as I went in, there was the smell of marble floors
and hospital. It was all as I had left it except that now it was spring.
I looked in the door of the big room and saw the major sitting at his
desk, the window open and the sunlight coming into the room. He did not
see me and I did not know whether to go in and report or go upstairs
first and clean up. I decided to go on upstairs.

The room I shared with the lieutenant Rinaldi looked out on the
courtyard. The window was open, my bed was made up with blankets and my
things hung on the wall, the gas mask in an oblong tin can, the steel
helmet on the same peg. At the foot of the bed was my flat trunk, and my
winter boots, the leather shiny with oil, were on the trunk. My Austrian
sniper’s rifle with its blued octagon barrel and the lovely dark walnut,
cheek-fitted, _schutzen_ stock, hung over the two beds. The telescope
that fitted it was, I remembered, locked in the trunk. The lieutenant,
Rinaldi, lay asleep on the other bed. He woke when he heard me in the
room and sat up.

“Ciaou!” he said. “What kind of time did you have?”

“Magnificent.”

We shook hands and he put his arm around my neck and kissed me.

“Oughf,” I said.

“You’re dirty,” he said. “You ought to wash. Where did you go and what
did you do? Tell me everything at once.”

“I went everywhere. Milan, Florence, Rome, Naples, Villa San Giovanni,
Messina, Taormina——”

“You talk like a time-table. Did you have any beautiful adventures?”

“Yes.”

“Where?”

“Milano, Firenze, Roma, Napoli——”

“That’s enough. Tell me really what was the best.”

“In Milano.”

“That was because it was first. Where did you meet her? In the Cova?
Where did you go? How did you feel? Tell me everything at once. Did you
stay all night?”

“Yes.”

“That’s nothing. Here now we have beautiful girls. New girls never been
to the front before.”

“Wonderful.”

“You don’t believe me? We will go now this afternoon and see. And in the
town we have beautiful English girls. I am now in love with Miss
Barkley. I will take you to call. I will probably marry Miss Barkley.”

“I have to get washed and report. Doesn’t anybody work now?”

“Since you are gone we have nothing but frostbites, chilblains,
jaundice, gonorrhea, self-inflicted wounds, pneumonia and hard and soft
chancres. Every week some one gets wounded by rock fragments. There are
a few real wounded. Next week the war starts again. Perhaps it starts
again. They say so. Do you think I would do right to marry Miss
Barkley—after the war of course?”

“Absolutely,” I said and poured the basin full of water.

“To-night you will tell me everything,” said Rinaldi. “Now I must go
back to sleep to be fresh and beautiful for Miss Barkley.”

I took off my tunic and shirt and washed in the cold water in the basin.
While I rubbed myself with a towel I looked around the room and out the
window and at Rinaldi lying with his eyes closed on the bed. He was
good-looking, was my age, and he came from Amalfi. He loved being a
surgeon and we were great friends. While I was looking at him he opened
his eyes.

“Have you any money?”

“Yes.”

“Loan me fifty lire.”

I dried my hands and took out my pocket-book from the inside of my tunic
hanging on the wall. Rinaldi took the note, folded it without rising
from the bed and slid it in his breeches pocket. He smiled, “I must make
on Miss Barkley the impression of a man of sufficient wealth. You are my
great and good friend and financial protector.”

“Go to hell,” I said.

That night at the mess I sat next to the priest and he was disappointed
and suddenly hurt that I had not gone to the Abruzzi. He had written to
his father that I was coming and they had made preparations. I myself
felt as badly as he did and could not understand why I had not gone. It
was what I had wanted to do and I tried to explain how one thing had led
to another and finally he saw it and understood that I had really wanted
to go and it was almost all right. I had drunk much wine and afterward
coffee and Strega and I explained, winefully, how we did not do the
things we wanted to do; we never did such things.

We two were talking while the others argued. I had wanted to go to
Abruzzi. I had gone to no place where the roads were frozen and hard as
iron, where it was clear cold and dry and the snow was dry and powdery
and hare-tracks in the snow and the peasants took off their hats and
called you Lord and there was good hunting. I had gone to no such place
but to the smoke of cafés and nights when the room whirled and you
needed to look at the wall to make it stop, nights in bed, drunk, when
you knew that that was all there was, and the strange excitement of
waking and not knowing who it was with you, and the world all unreal in
the dark and so exciting that you must resume again unknowing and not
caring in the night, sure that this was all and all and all and not
caring. Suddenly to care very much and to sleep to wake with it
sometimes morning and all that had been there gone and everything sharp
and hard and clear and sometimes a dispute about the cost. Sometimes
still pleasant and fond and warm and breakfast and lunch. Sometimes all
niceness gone and glad to get out on the street but always another day
starting and then another night. I tried to tell about the night and the
difference between the night and the day and how the night was better
unless the day was very clean and cold and I could not tell it; as I
cannot tell it now. But if you have had it you know. He had not had it
but he understood that I had really wanted to go to the Abruzzi but had
not gone and we were still friends, with many tastes alike, but with the
difference between us. He had always known what I did not know and what,
when I learned it, I was always able to forget. But I did not know that
then, although I learned it later. In the meantime we were all at the
mess, the meal was finished, and the argument went on. We two stopped
talking and the captain shouted, “Priest not happy. Priest not happy
without girls.”

“I am happy,” said the priest.

“Priest not happy. Priest wants Austrians to win the war,” the captain
said. The others listened. The priest shook his head.

“No,” he said.

“Priest wants us never to attack. Don’t you want us never to attack?”

“No. If there is a war I suppose we must attack.”

“Must attack. Shall attack!”

The priest nodded.

“Leave him alone,” the major said. “He’s all right.”

“He can’t do anything about it anyway,” the captain said. We all got up
and left the table.




                               CHAPTER IV

The battery in the next garden woke me in the morning and I saw the sun
coming through the window and got out of the bed. I went to the window
and looked out. The gravel paths were moist and the grass was wet with
dew. The battery fired twice and the air came each time like a blow and
shook the window and made the front of my pajamas flap. I could not see
the guns but they were evidently firing directly over us. It was a
nuisance to have them there but it was a comfort that they were no
bigger. As I looked out at the garden I heard a motor truck starting on
the road. I dressed, went downstairs, had some coffee in the kitchen and
went out to the garage.

Ten cars were lined up side by side under the long shed. They were
top-heavy, blunt-nosed ambulances, painted gray and built like
moving-vans. The mechanics were working on one out in the yard. Three
others were up in the mountains at dressing stations.

“Do they ever shell that battery?” I asked one of the mechanics.

“No, Signor Tenente. It is protected by the little hill.”

“How’s everything?”

“Not so bad. This machine is no good but the others march.” He stopped
working and smiled. “Were you on permission?”

“Yes.”

He wiped his hands on his jumper and grinned. “You have a good time?”
The others all grinned too.

“Fine,” I said. “What’s the matter with this machine?”

“It’s no good. One thing after another.”

“What’s the matter now?”

“New rings.”

I left them working, the car looking disgraced and empty with the engine
open and parts spread on the work bench, and went in under the shed and
looked at each of the cars. They were moderately clean, a few freshly
washed, the others dusty. I looked at the tires carefully, looking for
cuts or stone bruises. Everything seemed in good condition. It evidently
made no difference whether I was there to look after things or not. I
had imagined that the condition of the cars, whether or not things were
obtainable, the smooth functioning of the business of removing wounded
and sick from the dressing stations, hauling them back from the
mountains to the clearing station and then distributing them to the
hospitals named on their papers, depended to a considerable extent on
myself. Evidently it did not matter whether I was there or not.

“Has there been any trouble getting parts?” I asked the sergeant
mechanic.

“No, Signor Tenente.”

“Where is the gasoline park now?”

“At the same place.”

“Good,” I said and went back to the house and drank another bowl of
coffee at the mess table. The coffee was a pale gray and sweet with
condensed milk. Outside the window it was a lovely spring morning. There
was that beginning of a feeling of dryness in the nose that meant the
day would be hot later on. That day I visited the posts in the mountains
and was back in town late in the afternoon.

The whole thing seemed to run better while I was away. The offensive was
going to start again I heard. The division for which we worked were to
attack at a place up the river and the major told me that I would see
about the posts for during the attack. The attack would cross the river
up above the narrow gorge and spread up the hillside. The posts for the
cars would have to be as near the river as they could get and keep
covered. They would, of course, be selected by the infantry but we were
supposed to work it out. It was one of those things that gave you a
false feeling of soldiering.

I was very dusty and dirty and went up to my room to wash. Rinaldi was
sitting on the bed with a copy of Hugo’s English grammar. He was
dressed, wore his black boots, and his hair shone.

“Splendid,” he said when he saw me. “You will come with me to see Miss
Barkley.”

“No.”

“Yes. You will please come and make me a good impression on her.”

“All right. Wait till I get cleaned up.”

“Wash up and come as you are.”

I washed, brushed my hair and we started.

“Wait a minute,” Rinaldi said. “Perhaps we should have a drink.” He
opened his trunk and took out a bottle.

“Not Strega,” I said.

“No. Grappa.”

“All right.”

He poured two glasses and we touched them, first fingers extended. The
grappa was very strong.

“Another?”

“All right,” I said. We drank the second grappa, Rinaldi put away the
bottle and we went down the stairs. It was hot walking through the town
but the sun was starting to go down and it was very pleasant. The
British hospital was a big villa built by Germans before the war. Miss
Barkley was in the garden. Another nurse was with her. We saw their
white uniforms through the trees and walked toward them. Rinaldi
saluted. I saluted too but more moderately.

“How do you do?” Miss Barkley said. “You’re not an Italian, are you?”

“Oh, no.”

Rinaldi was talking with the other nurse. They were laughing.

“What an odd thing—to be in the Italian army.”

“It’s not really the army. It’s only the ambulance.”

“It’s very odd though. Why did you do it?”

“I don’t know,” I said. “There isn’t always an explanation for
everything.”

“Oh, isn’t there? I was brought up to think there was.”

“That’s awfully nice.”

“_Do_ we have to go on and talk this way?”

“No,” I said.

“That’s a relief. Isn’t it?”

“What is the stick?” I asked. Miss Barkley was quite tall. She wore what
seemed to me to be a nurse’s uniform, was blonde and had a tawny skin
and gray eyes. I thought she was very beautiful. She was carrying a thin
rattan stick like a toy riding-crop, bound in leather.

“It belonged to a boy who was killed last year.”

“I’m awfully sorry.”

“He was a very nice boy. He was going to marry me and he was killed in
the Somme.”

“It was a ghastly show.”

“Were you there?”

“No.”

“I’ve heard about it,” she said. “There’s not really any war of that
sort down here. They sent me the little stick. His mother sent it to me.
They returned it with his things.”

“Had you been engaged long?”

“Eight years. We grew up together.”

“And why didn’t you marry?”

“I don’t know,” she said. “I was a fool not to. I could have given him
that anyway. But I thought it would be bad for him.”

“I see.”

“Have you ever loved any one?”

“No,” I said.

We sat down on a bench and I looked at her.

“You have beautiful hair,” I said.

“Do you like it?”

“Very much.”

“I was going to cut it all off when he died.”

“No.”

“I wanted to do something for him. You see I didn’t care about the other
thing and he could have had it all. He could have had anything he wanted
if I would have known. I would have married him or anything. I know all
about it now. But then he wanted to go to war and I didn’t know.”

I did not say anything.

“I didn’t know about anything then. I thought it would be worse for him.
I thought perhaps he couldn’t stand it and then of course he was killed
and that was the end of it.”

“I don’t know.”

“Oh, yes,” she said. “That’s the end of it.”

We looked at Rinaldi talking with the other nurse.

“What is her name?”

“Ferguson. Helen Ferguson. Your friend is a doctor, isn’t he?”

“Yes. He’s very good.”

“That’s splendid. You rarely find any one any good this close to the
front. This is close to the front, isn’t it?”

“Quite.”

“It’s a silly front,” she said. “But it’s very beautiful. Are they going
to have an offensive?”

“Yes.”

“Then we’ll have to work. There’s no work now.”

“Have you done nursing long?”

“Since the end of ’fifteen. I started when he did. I remember having a
silly idea he might come to the hospital where I was. With a sabre cut,
I suppose, and a bandage around his head. Or shot through the shoulder.
Something picturesque.”

“This is the picturesque front,” I said.

“Yes,” she said. “People can’t realize what France is like. If they did,
it couldn’t all go on. He didn’t have a sabre cut. They blew him all to
bits.”

I didn’t say anything.

“Do you suppose it will always go on?”

“No.”

“What’s to stop it?”

“It will crack somewhere.”

“We’ll crack. We’ll crack in France. They can’t go on doing things like
the Somme and not crack.”

“They won’t crack here,” I said.

“You think not?”

“No. They did very well last summer.”

“They may crack,” she said. “Anybody may crack.”

“The Germans too.”

“No,” she said. “I think not.”

We went over toward Rinaldi and Miss Ferguson.

“You love Italy?” Rinaldi asked Miss Ferguson in English.

“Quite well.”

“No understand,” Rinaldi shook his head.

“Abbastanza bene,” I translated. He shook his head.

“That is not good. You love England?”

“Not too well. I’m Scotch, you see.”

Rinaldi looked at me blankly.

“She’s Scotch, so she loves Scotland better than England,” I said in
Italian.

“But Scotland is England.”

I translated this for Miss Ferguson.

“Pas encore,” said Miss Ferguson.

“Not really?”

“Never. We do not like the English.”

“Not like the English? Not like Miss Barkley?”

“Oh, that’s different. You mustn’t take everything so literally.”

After a while we said good-night and left. Walking home Rinaldi said,
“Miss Barkley prefers you to me. That is very clear. But the little
Scotch one is very nice.”

“Very,” I said. I had not noticed her. “You like her?”

“No,” said Rinaldi.




                               CHAPTER V

The next afternoon I went to call on Miss Barkley again. She was not in
the garden and I went to the side door of the villa where the ambulances
drove up. Inside I saw the head nurse, who said Miss Barkley was on
duty—“there’s a war on, you know.”

I said I knew.

“You’re the American in the Italian army?” she asked.

“Yes, ma’am.”

“How did you happen to do that? Why didn’t you join up with us?”

“I don’t know,” I said. “Could I join now?”

“I’m afraid not now. Tell me. Why did you join up with the Italians?”

“I was in Italy,” I said, “and I spoke Italian.”

“Oh,” she said. “I’m learning it. It’s a beautiful language.”

“Somebody said you should be able to learn it in two weeks.”

“Oh, I’ll not learn it in two weeks. I’ve studied it for months now. You
may come and see her after seven o’clock if you wish. She’ll be off
then. But don’t bring a lot of Italians.”

“Not even for the beautiful language?”

“No. Nor for the beautiful uniforms.”

“Good-evening,” I said.

“A rivederci, Tenente.”

“A rivederla.” I saluted and went out. It was impossible to salute
foreigners as an Italian, without embarrassment. The Italian salute
never seemed made for export.

The day had been hot. I had been up the river to the bridgehead at
Plava. It was there that the offensive was to begin. It had been
impossible to advance on the far side the year before because there was
only one road leading down from the pass to the pontoon bridge and it
was under machine-gun and shell fire for nearly a mile. It was not wide
enough either to carry all the transport for an offensive and the
Austrians could make a shambles out of it. But the Italians had crossed
and spread out a little way on the far side to hold about a mile and a
half on the Austrian side of the river. It was a nasty place and the
Austrians should not have let them hold it. I suppose it was mutual
tolerance because the Austrians still kept a bridgehead further down the
river. The Austrian trenches were above on the hillside only a few yards
from the Italian lines. There had been a little town but it was all
rubble. There was what was left of a railway station and a smashed
permanent bridge that could not be repaired and used because it was in
plain sight.

I went along the narrow road down toward the river, left the car at the
dressing station under the hill, crossed the pontoon bridge, which was
protected by a shoulder of the mountain, and went through the trenches
in the smashed-down town and along the edge of the slope. Everybody was
in the dugouts. There were racks of rockets standing to be touched off
to call for help from the artillery or to signal with if the telephone
wires were cut. It was quiet, hot and dirty. I looked across the wire at
the Austrian lines. Nobody was in sight. I had a drink with a captain
that I knew in one of the dugouts and went back across the bridge.

A new wide road was being finished that would go over the mountain and
zig-zag down to the bridge. When this road was finished the offensive
would start. It came down through the forest in sharp turns. The system
was to bring everything down the new road and take the empty trucks,
carts and loaded ambulances and all returning traffic up the old narrow
road. The dressing station was on the Austrian side of the river under
the edge of the hill and stretcher-bearers would bring the wounded back
across the pontoon bridge. It would be the same when the offensive
started. As far as I could make out the last mile or so of the new road
where it started to level out would be able to be shelled steadily by
the Austrians. It looked as though it might be a mess. But I found a
place where the cars would be sheltered after they had passed that last
bad-looking bit and could wait for the wounded to be brought across the
pontoon bridge. I would have liked to drive over the new road but it was
not yet finished. It looked wide and well made with a good grade and the
turns looked very impressive where you could see them through openings
in the forest on the mountain side. The cars would be all right with
their good metal-to-metal brakes and anyway, coming down, they would not
be loaded. I drove back up the narrow road.

Two carabinieri held the car up. A shell had fallen and while we waited
three others fell up the road. They were seventy-sevens and came with a
whishing rush of air, a hard bright burst and flash and then gray smoke
that blew across the road. The carabinieri waved us to go on. Passing
where the shells had landed I avoided the small broken places and
smelled the high explosive and the smell of blasted clay and stone and
freshly shattered flint. I drove back to Gorizia and our villa and, as I
said, went to call on Miss Barkley, who was on duty.

At dinner I ate very quickly and left for the villa where the British
had their hospital. It was really very large and beautiful and there
were fine trees in the grounds. Miss Barkley was sitting on a bench in
the garden. Miss Ferguson was with her. They seemed glad to see me and
in a little while Miss Ferguson excused herself and went away.

“I’ll leave you two,” she said. “You get along very well without me.”

“Don’t go, Helen,” Miss Barkley said.

“I’d really rather. I must write some letters.”

“Good-night,” I said.

“Good-night, Mr. Henry.”

“Don’t write anything that will bother the censor.”

“Don’t worry. I only write about what a beautiful place we live in and
how brave the Italians are.”

“That way you’ll be decorated.”

“That will be nice. Good-night, Catherine.”

“I’ll see you in a little while,” Miss Barkley said. Miss Ferguson
walked away in the dark.

“She’s nice,” I said.

“Oh, yes, she’s very nice. She’s a nurse.”

“Aren’t you a nurse?”

“Oh, no. I’m something called a V. A. D. We work very hard but no one
trusts us.”

“Why not?”

“They don’t trust us when there’s nothing going on. When there is really
work they trust us.”

“What is the difference?”

“A nurse is like a doctor. It takes a long time to be. A V. A. D. is a
short cut.”

“I see.”

“The Italians didn’t want women so near the front. So we’re all on very
special behavior. We don’t go out.”

“I can come here though.”

“Oh, yes. We’re not cloistered.”

“Let’s drop the war.”

“It’s very hard. There’s no place to drop it.”

“Let’s drop it anyway.”

“All right.”

We looked at each other in the dark. I thought she was very beautiful
and I took her hand. She let me take it and I held it and put my arm
around under her arm.

“No,” she said. I kept my arm where it was.

“Why not?”

“No.”

“Yes,” I said. “Please.” I leaned forward in the dark to kiss her and
there was a sharp stinging flash. She had slapped my face hard. Her hand
had hit my nose and eyes, and tears came in my eyes from the reflex.

“I’m so sorry,” she said. I felt I had a certain advantage.

“You were quite right.”

“I’m dreadfully sorry,” she said. “I just couldn’t stand the
nurse’s-evening-off aspect of it. I didn’t mean to hurt you. I did hurt
you, didn’t I?”

She was looking at me in the dark. I was angry and yet certain, seeing
it all ahead like the moves in a chess game.

“You did exactly right,” I said. “I don’t mind at all.”

“Poor man.”

“You see I’ve been leading a sort of a funny life. And I never even talk
English. And then you are so very beautiful.” I looked at her.

“You don’t need to say a lot of nonsense. I said I was sorry. We do get
along.”

“Yes,” I said. “And we have gotten away from the war.”

She laughed. It was the first time I had ever heard her laugh. I watched
her face.

“You are sweet,” she said.

“No, I’m not.”

“Yes. You are a dear. I’d be glad to kiss you if you don’t mind.”

I looked in her eyes and put my arm around her as I had before and
kissed her. I kissed her hard and held her tight and tried to open her
lips; they were closed tight. I was still angry and as I held her
suddenly she shivered. I held her close against me and could feel her
heart beating and her lips opened and her head went back against my hand
and then she was crying on my shoulder.

“Oh, darling,” she said. “You will be good to me, won’t you?”

What the hell, I thought. I stroked her hair and patted her shoulder.
She was crying.

“You will, won’t you?” She looked up at me. “Because we’re going to have
a strange life.”

After a while I walked with her to the door of the villa and she went in
and I walked home. Back at the villa I went upstairs to the room.
Rinaldi was lying on his bed. He looked at me.

“So you make progress with Miss Barkley?”

“We are friends.”

“You have that pleasant air of a dog in heat.”

I did not understand the word.

“Of a what?”

He explained.

“You,” I said, “have that pleasant air of a dog who—”

“Stop it,” he said. “In a little while we would say insulting things.”
He laughed.

“Good-night,” I said.

“Good-night, little puppy.”

I knocked over his candle with the pillow and got into bed in the dark.

Rinaldi picked up the candle, lit it and went on reading.




                               CHAPTER VI

I was away for two days at the posts. When I got home it was too late
and I did not see Miss Barkley until the next evening. She was not in
the garden and I had to wait in the office of the hospital until she
came down. There were many marble busts on painted wooden pillars along
the walls of the room they used for an office. The hall too, that the
office opened on, was lined with them. They had the complete marble
quality of all looking alike. Sculpture had always seemed a dull
business—still, bronzes looked like something. But marble busts all
looked like a cemetery. There was one fine cemetery though—the one at
Pisa. Genoa was the place to see the bad marbles. This had been the
villa of a very wealthy German and the busts must have cost him plenty.
I wondered who had done them and how much he got. I tried to make out
whether they were members of the family or what; but they were all
uniformly classical. You could not tell anything about them.

I sat on a chair and held my cap. We were supposed to wear steel helmets
even in Gorizia but they were uncomfortable and too bloody theatrical in
a town where the civilian inhabitants had not been evacuated. I wore one
when we went up to the posts and carried an English gas mask. We were
just beginning to get some of them. They were a real mask. Also we were
required to wear an automatic pistol; even doctors and sanitary
officers. I felt it against the back of the chair. You were liable to
arrest if you did not have one worn in plain sight. Rinaldi carried a
holster stuffed with toilet paper. I wore a real one and felt like a
gunman until I practised firing it. It was an Astra 7.65 caliber with a
short barrel and it jumped so sharply when you let it off that there was
no question of hitting anything. I practised with it, holding below the
target and trying to master the jerk of the ridiculous short barrel
until I could hit within a yard of where I aimed at twenty paces and
then the ridiculousness of carrying a pistol at all came over me and I
soon forgot it and carried it flopping against the small of my back with
no feeling at all except a vague sort of shame when I met
English-speaking people. I sat now in the chair and an orderly of some
sort looked at me disapprovingly from behind a desk while I looked at
the marble floor, the pillars with the marble busts, and the frescoes on
the wall and waited for Miss Barkley. The frescoes were not bad. Any
frescoes were good when they started to peel and flake off.

I saw Catherine Barkley coming down the hall, and stood up. She did not
seem tall walking toward me but she looked very lovely.

“Good-evening, Mr. Henry,” she said.

“How do you do?” I said. The orderly was listening behind the desk.

“Shall we sit here or go out in the garden?”

“Let’s go out. It’s much cooler.”

I walked behind her out into the garden, the orderly looking after us.
When we were out on the gravel drive she said, “Where have you been?”

“I’ve been out on post.”

“You couldn’t have sent me a note?”

“No,” I said. “Not very well. I thought I was coming back.”

“You ought to have let me know, darling.”

We were off the driveway, walking under the trees. I took her hands,
then stopped and kissed her.

“Isn’t there anywhere we can go?”

“No,” she said. “We have to just walk here. You’ve been away a long
time.”

“This is the third day. But I’m back now.”

She looked at me, “And you do love me?”

“Yes.”

“You did say you loved me, didn’t you?”

“Yes,” I lied. “I love you.” I had not said it before.

“And you call me Catherine?”

“Catherine.” We walked on a way and were stopped under a tree.

“Say, ‘I’ve come back to Catherine in the night.’”

“I’ve come back to Catherine in the night.”

“Oh, darling, you have come back, haven’t you?”

“Yes.”

“I love you so and it’s been awful. You won’t go away?”

“No. I’ll always come back.”

“Oh, I love you so. Please put your hand there again.”

“It’s not been away.” I turned her so I could see her face when I kissed
her and I saw that her eyes were shut. I kissed both her shut eyes. I
thought she was probably a little crazy. It was all right if she was. I
did not care what I was getting into. This was better than going every
evening to the house for officers where the girls climbed all over you
and put your cap on backward as a sign of affection between their trips
upstairs with brother officers. I knew I did not love Catherine Barkley
nor had any idea of loving her. This was a game, like bridge, in which
you said things instead of playing cards. Like bridge you had to pretend
you were playing for money or playing for some stakes. Nobody had
mentioned what the stakes were. It was all right with me.

“I wish there was some place we could go,” I said. I was experiencing
the masculine difficulty of making love very long standing up.

“There isn’t any place,” she said. She came back from wherever she had
been.

“We might sit there just for a little while.”

We sat on the flat stone bench and I held Catherine Barkley’s hand. She
would not let me put my arm around her.

“Are you very tired?” she asked.

“No.”

She looked down at the grass.

“This is a rotten game we play, isn’t it?”

“What game?”

“Don’t be dull.”

“I’m not, on purpose.”

“You’re a nice boy,” she said. “And you play it as well as you know how.
But it’s a rotten game.”

“Do you always know what people think?”

“Not always. But I do with you. You don’t have to pretend you love me.
That’s over for the evening. Is there anything you’d like to talk
about?”

“But I do love you.”

“Please let’s not lie when we don’t have to. I had a very fine little
show and I’m all right now. You see I’m not mad and I’m not gone off.
It’s only a little sometimes.”

I pressed her hand, “Dear Catherine.”

“It sounds very funny now—Catherine. You don’t pronounce it very much
alike. But you’re very nice. You’re a very good boy.”

“That’s what the priest said.”

“Yes, you’re very good. And you will come and see me?”

“Of course.”

“And you don’t have to say you love me. That’s all over for a while.”
She stood up and put out her hand. “Good-night.”

I wanted to kiss her.

“No,” she said. “I’m awfully tired.”

“Kiss me, though,” I said.

“I’m awfully tired, darling.”

“Kiss me.”

“Do you want to very much?”

“Yes.”

We kissed and she broke away suddenly. “No. Good-night, please,
darling.” We walked to the door and I saw her go in and down the hall. I
liked to watch her move. She went on down the hall. I went on home. It
was a hot night and there was a good deal going on up in the mountains.
I watched the flashes on San Gabriele.

I stopped in front of the Villa Rossa. The shutters were up but it was
still going on inside. Somebody was singing. I went on home. Rinaldi
came in while I was undressing.

“Ah, ha!” he said. “It does not go so well. Baby is puzzled.”

“Where have you been?”

“At the Villa Rossa. It was very edifying, baby. We all sang. Where have
you been?”

“Calling on the British.”

“Thank God I did not become involved with the British.”




                              CHAPTER VII

I came back the next afternoon from our first mountain post and stopped
the car at the _smistimento_ where the wounded and sick were sorted by
their papers and the papers marked for the different hospitals. I had
been driving and I sat in the car and the driver took the papers in. It
was a hot day and the sky was very bright and blue and the road was
white and dusty. I sat in the high seat of the Fiat and thought about
nothing. A regiment went by in the road and I watched them pass. The men
were hot and sweating. Some wore their steel helmets but most of them
carried them slung from their packs. Most of the helmets were too big
and came down almost over the ears of the men who wore them. The
officers all wore helmets; better-fitting helmets. It was half of the
brigata Basilicata. I identified them by their red and white striped
collar mark. There were stragglers going by long after the regiment had
passed—men who could not keep up with their platoons. They were sweaty,
dusty and tired. Some looked pretty bad. A soldier came along after the
last of the stragglers. He was walking with a limp. He stopped and sat
down beside the road. I got down and went over.

“What’s the matter?”

He looked at me, then stood up.

“I’m going on.”

“What’s the trouble?”

“—— the war.”

“What’s wrong with your leg?”

“It’s not my leg. I got a rupture.”

“Why don’t you ride with the transport?” I asked. “Why don’t you go to
the hospital?”

“They won’t let me. The lieutenant said I slipped the truss on purpose.”

“Let me feel it.”

“It’s way out.”

“Which side is it on?”

“Here.”

I felt it.

“Cough,” I said.

“I’m afraid it will make it bigger. It’s twice as big as it was this
morning.”

“Sit down,” I said. “As soon as I get the papers on these wounded I’ll
take you along the road and drop you with your medical officers.”

“He’ll say I did it on purpose.”

“They can’t do anything,” I said. “It’s not a wound. You’ve had it
before, haven’t you?”

“But I lost the truss.”

“They’ll send you to a hospital.”

“Can’t I stay here, Tenente?”

“No, I haven’t any papers for you.”

The driver came out of the door with the papers for the wounded in the
car.

“Four for 105. Two for 132,” he said. They were hospitals beyond the
river.

“You drive,” I said. I helped the soldier with the rupture up on the
seat with us.

“You speak English?” he asked.

“Sure.”

“How you like this goddam war?”

“Rotten.”

“I say it’s rotten. Jesus Christ, I say it’s rotten.”

“Were you in the States?”

“Sure. In Pittsburg. I knew you was an American.”

“Don’t I talk Italian good enough?”

“I knew you was an American all right.”

“Another American,” said the driver in Italian looking at the hernia
man.

“Listen, lootenant. Do you have to take me to that regiment?”

“Yes.”

“Because the captain doctor knew I had this rupture. I threw away the
goddam truss so it would get bad and I wouldn’t have to go to the line
again.”

“I see.”

“Couldn’t you take me no place else?”

“If it was closer to the front I could take you to a first medical post.
But back here you’ve got to have papers.”

“If I go back they’ll make me get operated on and then they’ll put me in
the line all the time.”

I thought it over.

“You wouldn’t want to go in the line all the time, would you?” he asked.

“No.”

“Jesus Christ, ain’t this a goddam war?”

“Listen,” I said. “You get out and fall down by the road and get a bump
on your head and I’ll pick you up on our way back and take you to a
hospital. We’ll stop by the road here, Aldo.” We stopped at the side of
the road. I helped him down.

“I’ll be right here, lieutenant,” he said.

“So long,” I said. We went on and passed the regiment about a mile
ahead, then crossed the river, cloudy with snow-water and running fast
through the spiles of the bridge, to ride along the road across the
plain and deliver the wounded at the two hospitals. I drove coming back
and went fast with the empty car to find the man from Pittsburg. First
we passed the regiment, hotter and slower than ever: then the
stragglers. Then we saw a horse ambulance stopped by the road. Two men
were lifting the hernia man to put him in. They had come back for him.
He shook his head at me. His helmet was off and his forehead was
bleeding below the hair line. His nose was skinned and there was dust on
the bloody patch and dust in his hair.

“Look at the bump, lieutenant!” he shouted. “Nothing to do. They come
back for me.”



When I got back to the villa it was five o’clock and I went out where we
washed the cars, to take a shower. Then I made out my report in my room,
sitting in my trousers and an undershirt in front of the open window. In
two days the offensive was to start and I would go with the cars to
Plava. It was a long time since I had written to the States and I knew I
should write but I had let it go so long that it was almost impossible
to write now. There was nothing to write about. I sent a couple of army
Zona di Guerra post-cards, crossing out everything except, I am well.
That should handle them. Those post-cards would be very fine in America;
strange and mysterious. This was a strange and mysterious war zone but I
supposed it was quite well run and grim compared to other wars with the
Austrians. The Austrian army was created to give Napoleon victories; any
Napoleon. I wished we had a Napoleon, but instead we had Il Generale
Cadorna, fat and prosperous, and Vittorio Emmanuele, the tiny man with
the long thin neck and the goat beard. Over on the right they had the
Duke of Aosta. Maybe he was too good-looking to be a great general but
he looked like a man. Lots of them would have liked him to be king. He
looked like a king. He was the King’s uncle and commanded the third
army. We were in the second army. There were some British batteries up
with the third army. I had met two gunners from that lot, in Milan. They
were very nice and we had a big evening. They were big and shy and
embarrassed and very appreciative together of anything that happened. I
wish that I was with the British. It would have been much simpler. Still
I would probably have been killed. Not in this ambulance business. Yes,
even in the ambulance business. British ambulance drivers were killed
sometimes. Well, I knew I would not be killed. Not in this war. It did
not have anything to do with me. It seemed no more dangerous to me
myself than war in the movies. I wished to God it was over though. Maybe
it would finish this summer. Maybe the Austrians would crack. They had
always cracked in other wars. What was the matter with this war?
Everybody said the French were through. Rinaldi said that the French had
mutinied and troops marched on Paris. I asked him what happened and he
said, “Oh, they stopped them.” I wanted to go to Austria without war. I
wanted to go to the Black Forest. I wanted to go to the Hartz Mountains.
Where were the Hartz Mountains anyway? They were fighting in the
Carpathians. I did not want to go there anyway. It might be good though.
I could go to Spain if there was no war. The sun was going down and the
day was cooling off. After supper I would go and see Catherine Barkley.
I wished she were here now. I wished I were in Milan with her. I would
like to eat at the Cova and then walk down the Via Manzoni in the hot
evening and cross over and turn off along the canal and go to the hotel
with Catherine Barkley. Maybe she would. Maybe she would pretend that I
was her boy that was killed and we would go in the front door and the
porter would take off his cap and I would stop at the concierge’s desk
and ask for the key and she would stand by the elevator and then we
would get in the elevator and it would go up very slowly clicking at all
the floors and then our floor and the boy would open the door and stand
there and she would step out and I would step out and we would walk down
the hall and I would put the key in the door and open it and go in and
then take down the telephone and ask them to send a bottle of capri
bianca in a silver bucket full of ice and you would hear the ice against
the pail coming down the corridor and the boy would knock and I would
say leave it outside the door please. Because we would not wear any
clothes because it was so hot and the window open and the swallows
flying over the roofs of the houses and when it was dark afterward and
you went to the window very small bats hunting over the houses and close
down over the trees and we would drink the capri and the door locked and
it hot and only a sheet and the whole night and we would both love each
other all night in the hot night in Milan. That was how it ought to be.
I would eat quickly and go and see Catherine Barkley.

They talked too much at the mess and I drank wine because to-night we
were not all brothers unless I drank a little and talked with the priest
about Archbishop Ireland who was, it seemed, a noble man and with whose
injustice, the injustices he had received and in which I participated as
an American, and of which I had never heard, I feigned acquaintance. It
would have been impolite not to have known something of them when I had
listened to such a splendid explanation of their causes which were,
after all, it seemed, misunderstandings. I thought he had a fine name
and he came from Minnesota which made a lovely name: Ireland of
Minnesota, Ireland of Wisconsin, Ireland of Michigan. What made it
pretty was that it sounded like Island. No that wasn’t it. There was
more to it than that. Yes, father. That is true, father. Perhaps,
father. No, father. Well, maybe yes, father. You know more about it than
I do, father. The priest was good but dull. The officers were not good
but dull. The King was good but dull. The wine was bad but not dull. It
took the enamel off your teeth and left it on the roof of your mouth.

“And the priest was locked up,” Rocca said, “because they found the
three per cent bonds on his person. It was in France of course. Here
they would never have arrested him. He denied all knowledge of the five
per cent bonds. This took place at Béziers. I was there and reading of
it in the paper, went to the jail and asked to see the priest. It was
quite evident he had stolen the bonds.”

“I don’t believe a word of this,” Rinaldi said.

“Just as you like,” Rocca said. “But I am telling it for our priest
here. It is very informative. He is a priest; he will appreciate it.”

The priest smiled. “Go on,” he said. “I am listening.”

“Of course some of the bonds were not accounted for but the priest had
all of the three per cent bonds and several local obligations, I forget
exactly what they were. So I went to the jail, now this is the point of
the story, and I stood outside his cell and I said as though I were
going to confession, ‘Bless me, father, for you have sinned.’”

There was great laughter from everybody.

“And what did he say?” asked the priest. Rocca ignored this and went on
to explain the joke to me. “You see the point, don’t you?” It seemed it
was a very funny joke if you understood it properly. They poured me more
wine and I told the story about the English private soldier who was
placed under the shower bath. Then the major told the story of the
eleven Czecho-slovaks and the Hungarian corporal. After some more wine I
told the story of the jockey who found the penny. The major said there
was an Italian story something like that about the duchess who could not
sleep at night. At this point the priest left and I told the story about
the travelling salesman who arrived at five o’clock in the morning at
Marseilles when the mistral was blowing. The major said he had heard a
report that I could drink. I denied this. He said it was true and by the
corpse of Bacchus we would test whether it was true or not. Not Bacchus,
I said. Not Bacchus. Yes, Bacchus, he said. I should drink cup for cup
and glass for glass with Bassi, Fillipo Vincenza. Bassi said no that was
no test because he had already drunk twice as much as I. I said that was
a foul lie and, Bacchus or no Bacchus, Fillipo Vincenza Bassi or Bassi
Fillippo Vicenza had never touched a drop all evening and what was his
name anyway? He said was my name Frederico Enrico or Enrico Federico? I
said let the best man win, Bacchus barred, and the major started us with
red wine in mugs. Half-way through the wine I did not want any more. I
remembered where I was going.

“Bassi wins,” I said. “He’s a better man than I am. I have to go.”

“He does really,” said Rinaldi. “He has a rendezvous. I know all about
it.”

“I have to go.”

“Another night,” said Bassi. “Another night when you feel stronger.” He
slapped me on the shoulder. There were lighted candles on the table. All
the officers were very happy. “Good-night, gentlemen,” I said.

Rinaldi went out with me. We stood outside the door on the patch and he
said, “You’d better not go up there drunk.”

“I’m not drunk, Rinin. Really.”

“You’d better chew some coffee.”

“Nonsense.”

“I’ll get some, baby. You walk up and down.” He came back with a handful
of roasted coffee beans. “Chew those, baby, and God be with you.”

“Bacchus,” I said.

“I’ll walk down with you.”

“I’m perfectly all right.”

We walked along together through the town and I chewed the coffee. At
the gate of the driveway that led up to the British villa, Rinaldi said
good-night.

“Good-night,” I said. “Why don’t you come in?”

He shook his head. “No,” he said, “I like the simpler pleasures.”

“Thank you for the coffee beans.”

“Nothing, baby. Nothing.”

I started down the driveway. The outlines of the cypresses that lined it
were sharp and clear. I looked back and saw Rinaldi standing watching me
and waved to him.

I sat in the reception hall of the villa, waiting for Catherine Barkley
to come down. Some one was coming down the hall-way. I stood up, but it
was not Catherine. It was Miss Ferguson.

“Hello,” she said. “Catherine asked me to tell you she was sorry she
couldn’t see you this evening.”

“I’m so sorry. I hope she’s not ill.”

“She’s not awfully well.”

“Will you tell her how sorry I am?”

“Yes, I will.”

“Do you think it would be any good to try and see her to-morrow?”

“Yes, I do.”

“Thank you very much,” I said. “Good-night.”

I went out the door and suddenly I felt lonely and empty. I had treated
seeing Catherine very lightly, I had gotten somewhat drunk and had
nearly forgotten to come but when I could not see her there I was
feeling lonely and hollow.




                              CHAPTER VIII

The next afternoon we heard there was to be an attack up the river that
night and that we were to take four cars there. Nobody knew anything
about it although they all spoke with great positiveness and strategical
knowledge. I was riding in the first car and as we passed the entry to
the British hospital I told the driver to stop. The other cars pulled
up. I got out and told the driver to go on and that if we had not caught
up to them at the junction of the road to Cormons to wait there. I
hurried up the driveway and inside the reception hall I asked for Miss
Barkley.

“She’s on duty.”

“Could I see her just for a moment?”

They sent an orderly to see and she came back with him.

“I stopped to ask if you were better. They told me you were on duty, so
I asked to see you.”

“I’m quite well,” she said, “I think the heat knocked me over
yesterday.”

“I have to go.”

“I’ll just step out the door a minute.”

“And you’re all right?” I asked outside.

“Yes, darling. Are you coming to-night?”

“No. I’m leaving now for a show up above Plava.”

“A show?”

“I don’t think it’s anything.”

“And you’ll be back?”

“To-morrow.”

She was unclasping something from her neck. She put it in my hand. “It’s
a Saint Anthony,” she said. “And come to-morrow night.”

“You’re not a Catholic, are you?”

“No. But they say a Saint Anthony’s very useful.”

“I’ll take care of him for you. Good-by.”

“No,” she said, “not good-by.”

“All right.”

“Be a good boy and be careful. No, you can’t kiss me here. You can’t.”

“All right.”

I looked back and saw her standing on the steps. She waved and I kissed
my hand and held it out. She waved again and then I was out of the
driveway and climbing up into the seat of the ambulance and we started.
The Saint Anthony was in a little white metal capsule. I opened the
capsule and spilled him out into my hand.

“Saint Anthony?” asked the driver.

“Yes.”

“I have one.” His right hand left the wheel and opened a button on his
tunic and pulled it out from under his shirt.

“See?”

I put my Saint Anthony back in the capsule, spilled the thin gold chain
together and put it all in my breast pocket.

“You don’t wear him?”

“No.”

“It’s better to wear him. That’s what it’s for.”

“All right,” I said. I undid the clasp of the gold chain and put it
around my neck and clasped it. The saint hung down on the outside of my
uniform and I undid the throat of my tunic, unbuttoned the shirt collar
and dropped him in under the shirt. I felt him in his metal box against
my chest while we drove. Then I forgot about him. After I was wounded I
never found him. Some one probably got it at one of the dressing
stations.

We drove fast when we were over the bridge and soon we saw the dust of
the other cars ahead down the road. The road curved and we saw the three
cars looking quite small, the dust rising from the wheels and going off
through the trees. We caught them and passed them and turned off on a
road that climbed up into the hills. Driving in convoy is not unpleasant
if you are the first car and I settled back in the seat and watched the
country. We were in the foot-hills on the near side of the river and as
the road mounted there were the high mountains off to the north with
snow still on the tops. I looked back and saw the three cars all
climbing, spaced by the interval of their dust. We passed a long column
of loaded mules, the drivers walking along beside the mules wearing red
fezzes. They were bersaglieri.

Beyond the mule train the road was empty and we climbed through the
hills and then went down over the shoulder of a long hill into a
river-valley. There were trees along both sides of the road and through
the right line of trees I saw the river, the water clear, fast and
shallow. The river was low and there were stretches of sand and pebbles
with a narrow channel of water and sometimes the water spread like a
sheen over the pebbly bed. Close to the bank I saw deep pools, the water
blue like the sky. I saw arched stone bridges over the river where
tracks turned off from the road and we passed stone farmhouses with pear
trees candelabraed against their south walls and low stone walls in the
fields. The road went up the valley a long way and then we turned off
and commenced to climb into the hills again. The road climbed steeply
going up and back and forth through chestnut woods to level finally
along a ridge. I could look down through the woods and see, far below,
with the sun on it, the line of the river that separated the two armies.
We went along the rough new military road that followed the crest of the
ridge and I looked to the north at the two ranges of mountains, green
and dark to the snow-line and then white and lovely in the sun. Then, as
the road mounted along the ridge, I saw a third range of mountains,
higher snow mountains, that looked chalky white and furrowed, with
strange planes, and then there were mountains far off beyond all these
that you could hardly tell if you really saw. Those were all the
Austrians’ mountains and we had nothing like them. Ahead there was a
rounded turn-off in the road to the right and looking down I could see
the road dropping through the trees. There were troops on this road and
motor trucks and mules with mountain guns and as we went down, keeping
to the side, I could see the river far down below, the line of ties and
rails running along it, the old bridge where the railway crossed to the
other side and across, under a hill beyond the river, the broken houses
of the little town that was to be taken.

It was nearly dark when we came down and turned onto the main road that
ran beside the river.




                               CHAPTER IX

The road was crowded and there were screens of corn-stalk and straw
matting on both sides and matting over the top so that it was like the
entrance at a circus or a native village. We drove slowly in this
matting-covered tunnel and came out onto a bare cleared space where the
railway station had been. The road here was below the level of the river
bank and all along the side of the sunken road there were holes dug in
the bank with infantry in them. The sun was going down and looking up
along the bank as we drove I saw the Austrian observation balloons above
the hills on the other side dark against the sunset. We parked the cars
beyond a brickyard. The ovens and some deep holes had been equipped as
dressing stations. There were three doctors that I knew. I talked with
the major and learned that when it should start and our cars should be
loaded we would drive them back along the screened road and up to the
main road along the ridge where there would be a post and other cars to
clear them. He hoped the road would not jam. It was a one-road show. The
road was screened because it was in sight of the Austrians across the
river. Here at the brickyard we were sheltered from rifle or machine-gun
fire by the river bank. There was one smashed bridge across the river.
They were going to put over another bridge when the bombardment started
and some troops were to cross at the shallows up above at the bend of
the river. The major was a little man with upturned mustaches. He had
been in the war in Libya and wore two wound-stripes. He said that if the
thing went well he would see that I was decorated. I said I hoped it
would go well but that he was too kind. I asked him if there was a big
dugout where the drivers could stay and he sent a soldier to show me. I
went with him and found the dugout, which was very good. The drivers
were pleased with it and I left them there. The major asked me to have a
drink with him and two other officers. We drank rum and it was very
friendly. Outside it was getting dark. I asked what time the attack was
to be and they said as soon as it was dark. I went back to the drivers.
They were sitting in the dugout talking and when I came in they stopped.
I gave them each a package of cigarettes, Macedonias, loosely packed
cigarettes that spilled tobacco and needed to have the ends twisted
before you smoked them. Manera lit his lighter and passed it around. The
lighter was shaped like a Fiat radiator. I told them what I had heard.

“Why didn’t we see the post when we came down?” Passini asked.

“It was just beyond where we turned off.”

“That road will be a dirty mess,” Manera said.

“They’ll shell the —— out of us.”

“Probably.”

“What about eating, lieutenant? We won’t get a chance to eat after this
thing starts.”

“I’ll go and see now,” I said.

“You want us to stay here or can we look around?”

“Better stay here.”

I went back to the major’s dugout and he said the field kitchen would be
along and the drivers could come and get their stew. He would loan them
mess tins if they did not have them. I said I thought they had them. I
went back and told the drivers I would get them as soon as the food
came. Manera said he hoped it would come before the bombardment started.
They were silent until I went out. They were all mechanics and hated the
war.

I went out to look at the cars and see what was going on and then came
back and sat down in the dugout with the four drivers. We sat on the
ground with our backs against the wall and smoked. Outside it was nearly
dark. The earth of the dugout was warm and dry and I let my shoulders
back against the wall, sitting on the small of my back, and relaxed.

“Who goes to the attack?” asked Gavuzzi.

“Bersaglieri.”

“All bersaglieri?”

“I think so.”

“There aren’t enough troops here for a real attack.”

“It is probably to draw attention from where the real attack will be.”

“Do the men know that who attack?”

“I don’t think so.”

“Of course they don’t,” Manera said. “They wouldn’t attack if they did.”

“Yes they would,” Passini said. “Bersaglieri are fools.”

“They are brave and have good discipline,” I said.

“They are big through the chest by measurement, and healthy. But they
are still fools.”

“The granatieri are tall,” Manera said. This was a joke. They all
laughed.

“Were you there, Tenente, when they wouldn’t attack and they shot every
tenth man?”

“No.”

“It is true. They lined them up afterward and took every tenth man.
Carabinieri shot them.”

“Carabinieri,” said Passini and spat on the floor. “But those
grenadiers; all over six feet. They wouldn’t attack.”

“If everybody would not attack the war would be over,” Manera said.

“It wasn’t that way with the granatieri. They were afraid. The officers
all came from such good families.”

“Some of the officers went alone.”

“A sergeant shot two officers who would not get out.”

“Some troops went out.”

“Those that went out were not lined up when they took the tenth men.”

“One of those shot by the carabinieri is from my town,” Passini said.
“He was a big smart tall boy to be in the granatieri. Always in Rome.
Always with the girls. Always with the carabinieri.” He laughed. “Now
they have a guard outside his house with a bayonet and nobody can come
to see his mother and father and sisters and his father loses his civil
rights and cannot even vote. They are all without law to protect them.
Anybody can take their property.”

“If it wasn’t that that happens to their families nobody would go to the
attack.”

“Yes. Alpini would. These V. E. soldiers would. Some bersaglieri.”

“Bersaglieri have run too. Now they try to forget it.”

“You should not let us talk this way, Tenente. Evviva l’esercito,”
Passini said sarcastically.

“I know how you talk,” I said. “But as long as you drive the cars and
behave——”

“—and don’t talk so other officers can hear,” Manera finished.

“I believe we should get the war over,” I said. “It would not finish it
if one side stopped fighting. It would only be worse if we stopped
fighting.”

“It could not be worse,” Passini said respectfully. “There is nothing
worse than war.”

“Defeat is worse.”

“I do not believe it,” Passini said still respectfully. “What is defeat?
You go home.”

“They come after you. They take your home. They take your sisters.”

“I don’t believe it,” Passini said. “They can’t do that to everybody.
Let everybody defend his home. Let them keep their sisters in the
house.”

“They hang you. They come and make you be a soldier again. Not in the
auto-ambulance, in the infantry.”

“They can’t hang every one.”

“An outside nation can’t make you be a soldier,” Manera said. “At the
first battle you all run.”

“Like the Tchecos.”

“I think you do not know anything about being conquered and so you think
it is not bad.”

“Tenente,” Passini said. “We understand you let us talk. Listen. There
is nothing as bad as war. We in the auto-ambulance cannot even realize
at all how bad it is. When people realize how bad it is they cannot do
anything to stop it because they go crazy. There are some people who
never realize. There are people who are afraid of their officers. It is
with them that war is made.”

“I know it is bad but we must finish it.”

“It doesn’t finish. There is no finish to a war.”

“Yes there is.”

Passini shook his head.

“War is not won by victory. What if we take San Gabriele? What if we
take the Carso and Monfalcone and Trieste? Where are we then? Did you
see all the far mountains to-day? Do you think we could take all them
too? Only if the Austrians stop fighting. One side must stop fighting.
Why don’t we stop fighting? If they come down into Italy they will get
tired and go away. They have their own country. But no, instead there is
a war.”

“You’re an orator.”

“We think. We read. We are not peasants. We are mechanics. But even the
peasants know better than to believe in a war. Everybody hates this
war.”

“There is a class that controls a country that is stupid and does not
realize anything and never can. That is why we have this war.”

“Also they make money out of it.”

“Most of them don’t,” said Passini. “They are too stupid. They do it for
nothing. For stupidity.”

“We must shut up,” said Manera. “We talk too much even for the Tenente.”

“He likes it,” said Passini. “We will convert him.”

“But now we will shut up,” Manera said.

“Do we eat yet, Tenente?” Gavuzzi asked.

“I will go and see,” I said. Gordini stood up and went outside with me.

“Is there anything I can do, Tenente? Can I help in any way?” He was the
quietest one of the four. “Come with me if you want,” I said, “and we’ll
see.”

It was dark outside and the long light from the search-lights was moving
over the mountains. There were big search-lights on that front mounted
on camions that you passed sometimes on the roads at night, close behind
the lines, the camion stopped a little off the road, an officer
directing the light and the crew scared. We crossed the brickyard, and
stopped at the main dressing station. There was a little shelter of
green branches outside over the entrance and in the dark the night wind
rustled the leaves dried by the sun. Inside there was a light. The major
was at the telephone sitting on a box. One of the medical captains said
the attack had been put forward an hour. He offered me a glass of
cognac. I looked at the board tables, the instruments shining in the
light, the basins and the stoppered bottles. Gordini stood behind me.
The major got up from the telephone.

“It starts now,” he said. “It has been put back again.”

I looked outside, it was dark and the Austrian search-lights were moving
on the mountains behind us. It was quiet for a moment still, then from
all the guns behind us the bombardment started.

“Savoia,” said the major.

“About the soup, major,” I said. He did not hear me. I repeated it.

“It hasn’t come up.”

A big shell came in and burst outside in the brickyard. Another burst
and in the noise you could hear the smaller noise of the brick and dirt
raining down.

“What is there to eat?”

“We have a little pasta asciutta,” the major said.

“I’ll take what you can give me.”

The major spoke to an orderly who went out of sight in the back and came
back with a metal basin of cold cooked macaroni. I handed it to Gordini.

“Have you any cheese?”

The major spoke grudgingly to the orderly who ducked back into the hole
again and came out with a quarter of a white cheese.

“Thank you very much,” I said.

“You’d better not go out.”

Outside something was set down beside the entrance. One of the two men
who had carried it looked in.

“Bring him in,” said the major. “What’s the matter with you? Do you want
us to come outside and get him?”

The two stretcher-bearers picked up the man under the arms and by the
legs and brought him in.

“Slit the tunic,” the major said.

He held a forceps with some gauze in the end. The two captains took off
their coats. “Get out of here,” the major said to the two
stretcher-bearers.

“Come on,” I said to Gordini.

“You better wait until the shelling is over,” the major said over his
shoulder.

“They want to eat,” I said.

“As you wish.”

Outside we ran across the brickyard. A shell burst short near the river
bank. Then there was one that we did not hear coming until the sudden
rush. We both went flat and with the flash and bump of the burst and the
smell heard the singing off of the fragments and the rattle of falling
brick. Gordini got up and ran for the dugout. I was after him, holding
the cheese, its smooth surface covered with brick dust. Inside the
dugout were the three drivers sitting against the wall, smoking.

“Here, you patriots,” I said.

“How are the cars?” Manera asked.

“All right.”

“Did they scare you, Tenente?”

“You’re damned right,” I said.

I took out my knife, opened it, wiped off the blade and pared off the
dirty outside surface of the cheese. Gavuzzi handed me the basin of
macaroni.

“Start in to eat, Tenente.”

“No,” I said. “Put it on the floor. We’ll all eat.”

“There are no forks.”

“What the hell,” I said in English.

I cut the cheese into pieces and laid them on the macaroni.

“Sit down to it,” I said. They sat down and waited. I put thumb and
fingers into the macaroni and lifted. A mass loosened.

“Lift it high, Tenente.”

I lifted it to arm’s length and the strands cleared. I lowered it into
the mouth, sucked and snapped in the ends, and chewed, then took a bite
of cheese, chewed, and then a drink of the wine. It tasted of rusty
metal. I handed the canteen back to Passini.

“It’s rotten,” he said. “It’s been in there too long. I had it in the
car.”

They were all eating, holding their chins close over the basin, tipping
their heads back, sucking in the ends. I took another mouthful and some
cheese and a rinse of wine. Something landed outside that shook the
earth.

“Four hundred twenty or minnenwerfer,” Gavuzzi said.

“There aren’t any four hundred twenties in the mountains,” I said.

“They have big Skoda guns. I’ve seen the holes.”

“Three hundred fives.”

We went on eating. There was a cough, a noise like a railway engine
starting and then an explosion that shook the earth again.

“This isn’t a deep dugout,” Passini said.

“That was a big trench-mortar.”

“Yes, sir.”

I ate the end of my piece of cheese and took a swallow of wine. Through
the other noise I heard a cough, then came the chuh-chuh-chuh-chuh—then
there was a flash, as when a blast-furnace door is swung open, and a
roar that started white and went red and on and on in a rushing wind. I
tried to breathe but my breath would not come and I felt myself rush
bodily out of myself and out and out and out and all the time bodily in
the wind. I went out swiftly, all of myself, and I knew I was dead and
that it had all been a mistake to think you just died. Then I floated,
and instead of going on I felt myself slide back. I breathed and I was
back. The ground was torn up and in front of my head there was a
splintered beam of wood. In the jolt of my head I heard somebody crying.
I thought somebody was screaming. I tried to move but I could not move.
I heard the machine-guns and rifles firing across the river and all
along the river. There was a great splashing and I saw the star-shells
go up and burst and float whitely and rockets going up and heard the
bombs, all this in a moment, and then I heard close to me some one
saying “Mama Mia! Oh, mama Mia!” I pulled and twisted and got my legs
loose finally and turned around and touched him. It was Passini and when
I touched him he screamed. His legs were toward me and I saw in the dark
and the light that they were both smashed above the knee. One leg was
gone and the other was held by tendons and part of the trouser and the
stump twitched and jerked as though it were not connected. He bit his
arm and moaned, “Oh mama mia, mama Mia,” then, “Dio te salve, Maria. Dio
te salve, Maria. Oh Jesus shoot me Christ shoot me mama mia mama Mia oh
purest lovely Mary shoot me. Stop it. Stop it. Stop it. Oh Jesus lovely
Mary stop it. Oh oh oh oh,” then choking, “Mama mama mia.” Then he was
quiet, biting his arm, the stump of his leg twitching.

“Porta feriti!” I shouted holding my hands cupped. “Porta Feriti!” I
tried to get closer to Passini to try to put a tourniquet on the legs
but I could not move. I tried again and my legs moved a little. I could
pull backward along with my arms and elbows. Passini was quiet now. I
sat beside him, undid my tunic and tried to rip the tail of my shirt. It
would not rip and I bit the edge of the cloth to start it. Then I
thought of his puttees. I had on wool stockings but Passini wore
puttees. All the drivers wore puttees but Passini had only one leg. I
unwound the puttee and while I was doing it I saw there was no need to
try and make a tourniquet because he was dead already. I made sure he
was dead. There were three others to locate. I sat up straight and as I
did so something inside my head moved like the weights on a doll’s eyes
and it hit me inside in back of my eyeballs. My legs felt warm and wet
and my shoes were wet and warm inside. I knew that I was hit and leaned
over and put my hand on my knee. My knee wasn’t there. My hand went in
and my knee was down on my shin. I wiped my hand on my shirt and another
floating light came very slowly down and I looked at my leg and was very
afraid. Oh, God, I said, get me out of here. I knew, however, that there
had been three others. There were four drivers. Passini was dead. That
left three. Some one took hold of me under the arms and somebody else
lifted my legs.

“There are three others,” I said. “One is dead.”

“It’s Manera. We went for a stretcher but there wasn’t any. How are you,
Tenente?”

“Where is Gordini and Gavuzzi?”

“Gordini’s at the post getting bandaged. Gavuzzi has your legs. Hold on
to my neck, Tenente. Are you badly hit?”

“In the leg. How is Gordini?”

“He’s all right. It was a big trench-mortar shell.”

“Passini’s dead.”

“Yes. He’s dead.”

A shell fell close and they both dropped to the ground and dropped me.
“I’m sorry, Tenente,” said Manera. “Hang onto my neck.”

“If you drop me again.”

“It was because we were scared.”

“Are you unwounded?”

“We are both wounded a little.”

“Can Gordini drive?”

“I don’t think so.”

They dropped me once more before we reached the post.

“You sons of bitches,” I said.

“I am sorry, Tenente,” Manera said. “We won’t drop you again.”

Outside the post a great many of us lay on the ground in the dark. They
carried wounded in and brought them out. I could see the light come out
from the dressing station when the curtain opened and they brought some
one in or out. The dead were off to one side. The doctors were working
with their sleeves up to their shoulders and were red as butchers. There
were not enough stretchers. Some of the wounded were noisy but most were
quiet. The wind blew the leaves in the bower over the door of the
dressing station and the night was getting cold. Stretcher-bearers came
in all the time, put their stretchers down, unloaded them and went away.
As soon as I got to the dressing station Manera brought a medical
sergeant out and he put bandages on both my legs. He said there was so
much dirt blown into the wound that there had not been much hemorrhage.
They would take me as soon as possible. He went back inside. Gordini
could not drive, Manera said. His shoulder was smashed and his head was
hurt. He had not felt bad but now the shoulder had stiffened. He was
sitting up beside one of the brick walls. Manera and Gavuzzi each went
off with a load of wounded. They could drive all right. The British had
come with three ambulances and they had two men on each ambulance. One
of their drivers came over to me, brought by Gordini who looked very
white and sick. The Britisher leaned over.

“Are you hit badly?” he asked. He was a tall man and wore steel-rimmed
spectacles.

“In the legs.”

“It’s not serious I hope. Will you have a cigarette?”

“Thanks.”

“They tell me you’ve lost two drivers.”

“Yes. One killed and the fellow that brought you.”

“What rotten luck. Would you like us to take the cars?”

“That’s what I wanted to ask you.”

“We’d take quite good care of them and return them to the Villa. 206
aren’t you?”

“Yes.”

“It’s a charming place. I’ve seen you about. They tell me you’re an
American.”

“Yes.”

“I’m English.”

“No!”

“Yes, English. Did you think I was Italian? There were some Italians
with one of our units.”

“It would be fine if you would take the cars,” I said.

“We’ll be most careful of them,” he straightened up. “This chap of yours
was very anxious for me to see you.” He patted Gordini on the shoulder.
Gordini winced and smiled. The Englishman broke into voluble and perfect
Italian. “Now everything is arranged. I’ve seen your Tenente. We will
take over the two cars. You won’t worry now.” He broke off, “I must do
something about getting you out of here. I’ll see the medical wallahs.
We’ll take you back with us.”

He walked across to the dressing station, stepping carefully among the
wounded. I saw the blanket open, the light came out and he went in.

“He will look after you, Tenente,” Gordini said.

“How are you, Franco?”

“I am all right.” He sat down beside me. In a moment the blanket in
front of the dressing station opened and two stretcher-bearers came out
followed by the tall Englishman. He brought them over to me.

“Here is the American Tenente,” he said in Italian.

“I’d rather wait,” I said. “There are much worse wounded than me. I’m
all right.”

“Come come,” he said. “Don’t be a bloody hero.” Then in Italian: “Lift
him very carefully about the legs. His legs are very painful. He is the
legitimate son of President Wilson.” They picked me up and took me into
the dressing room. Inside they were operating on all the tables. The
little major looked at us furious. He recognized me and waved a forceps.

“Ça va bien?”

“Ça va.”

“I have brought him in,” the tall Englishman said in Italian. “The only
son of the American Ambassador. He can be here until you are ready to
take him. Then I will take him with my first load.” He bent over me.
“I’ll look up their adjutant to do your papers and it will all go much
faster.” He stooped to go under the doorway and went out. The major was
unhooking the forceps now, dropping them in a basin. I followed his
hands with my eyes. Now he was bandaging. Then the stretcher-bearers
took the man off the table.

“I’ll take the American Tenente,” one of the captains said. They lifted
me onto the table. It was hard and slippery. There were many strong
smells, chemical smells and the sweet smell of blood. They took off my
trousers and the medical captain commenced dictating to the
sergeant-adjutant while he worked, “Multiple superficial wounds of the
left and right thigh and left and right knee and right foot. Profound
wounds of right knee and foot. Lacerations of the scalp (he probed—Does
that hurt?—Christ, yes!) with possible fracture of the skull. Incurred
in the line of duty. That’s what keeps you from being court-martialled
for self-inflicted wounds,” he said. “Would you like a drink of brandy?
How did you run into this thing anyway? What were you trying to do?
Commit suicide? Anti-tetanus please, and mark a cross on both legs.
Thank you. I’ll clean this up a little, wash it out, and put on a
dressing. Your blood coagulates beautifully.”

The adjutant, looking up from the paper, “What inflicted the wounds?”

The medical captain, “What hit you?”

Me, with the eyes shut, “A trench mortar shell.”

The captain, doing things that hurt sharply and severing tissue—“Are
you sure?”

Me—trying to lie still and feeling my stomach flutter when the flesh
was cut, “I think so.”

Captain doctor—(interested in something he was finding), “Fragments of
enemy trench-mortar shell. Now I’ll probe for some of this if you like
but it’s not necessary. I’ll paint all this and—Does that sting? Good,
that’s nothing to how it will feel later. The pain hasn’t started yet.
Bring him a glass of brandy. The shock dulls the pain; but this is all
right, you have nothing to worry about if it doesn’t infect and it
rarely does now. How is your head?”

“Good Christ!” I said.

“Better not drink too much brandy then. If you’ve got a fracture you
don’t want inflammation. How does that feel?”

Sweat ran all over me.

“Good Christ!” I said.

“I guess you’ve got a fracture all right. I’ll wrap you up and don’t
bounce your head around.” He bandaged, his hands moving very fast and
the bandage coming taut and sure. “All right, good luck and Vive la
France.”

“He’s an American,” one of the other captains said.

“I thought you said he was a Frenchman. He talks French,” the captain
said. “I’ve known him before. I always thought he was French.” He drank
a half tumbler of cognac. “Bring on something serious. Get some more of
that Anti-tetanus.” The captain waved to me. They lifted me and the
blanket-flap went across my face as we went out. Outside the
sergeant-adjutant knelt down beside me where I lay, “Name?” he asked
softly. “Middle name? First name? Rank? Where born? What class? What
corps?” and so on. “I’m sorry for your head, Tenente. I hope you feel
better. I’m sending you now with the English ambulance.”

“I’m all right,” I said. “Thank you very much.” The pain that the major
had spoken about had started and all that was happening was without
interest or relation. After a while the English ambulance came up and
they put me onto a stretcher and lifted the stretcher up to the
ambulance level and shoved it in. There was another stretcher by the
side with a man on it whose nose I could see, waxy-looking, out of the
bandages. He breathed very heavily. There were stretchers lifted and
slid into the slings above. The tall English driver came around and
looked in, “I’ll take it very easily,” he said. “I hope you’ll be
comfy.” I felt the engine start, felt him climb up into the front seat,
felt the brake come off and the clutch go in, then we started. I lay
still and let the pain ride.

As the ambulance climbed along the road, it was slow in the traffic,
sometimes it stopped, sometimes it backed on a turn, then finally it
climbed quite fast. I felt something dripping. At first it dropped
slowly and regularly, then it pattered into a stream. I shouted to the
driver. He stopped the car and looked in through the hole behind his
seat.

“What is it?”

“The man on the stretcher over me has a hemorrhage.”

“We’re not far from the top. I wouldn’t be able to get the stretcher out
alone.” He started the car. The stream kept on. In the dark I could not
see where it came from the canvas overhead. I tried to move sideways so
that it did not fall on me. Where it had run down under my shirt it was
warm and sticky. I was cold and my leg hurt so that it made me sick.
After a while the stream from the stretcher above lessened and started
to drip again and I heard and felt the canvas above move as the man on
the stretcher settled more comfortably.

“How is he?” the Englishman called back. “We’re almost up.”

“He’s dead I think,” I said.

The drops fell very slowly, as they fall from an icicle after the sun
has gone. It was cold in the car in the night as the road climbed. At
the post on the top they took the stretcher out and put another in and
we went on.




                               CHAPTER X

In the ward at the field hospital they told me a visitor was coming to
see me in the afternoon. It was a hot day and there were many flies in
the room. My orderly had cut paper into strips and tied the strips to a
stick to make a brush that swished the flies away. I watched them settle
on the ceiling. When he stopped swishing and fell asleep they came down
and I blew them away and finally covered my face with my hands and slept
too. It was very hot and when I woke my legs itched. I waked the orderly
and he poured mineral water on the dressings. That made the bed damp and
cool. Those of us that were awake talked across the ward. The afternoon
was a quiet time. In the morning they came to each bed in turn, three
men nurses and a doctor and picked you up out of bed and carried you
into the dressing room so that the beds could be made while we were
having our wounds dressed. It was not a pleasant trip to the dressing
room and I did not know until later that beds could be made with men in
them. My orderly had finished pouring water and the bed felt cool and
lovely and I was telling him where to scratch on the soles of my feet
against the itching when one of the doctors brought in Rinaldi. He came
in very fast and bent down over the bed and kissed me. I saw he wore
gloves.

“How are you, baby? How do you feel? I bring you this—” It was a bottle
of cognac. The orderly brought a chair and he sat down, “and good news.
You will be decorated. They want to get you the medaglia d’argento but
perhaps they can get only the bronze.”

“What for?”

“Because you are gravely wounded. They say if you can prove you did any
heroic act you can get the silver. Otherwise it will be the bronze. Tell
me exactly what happened. Did you do any heroic act?”

“No,” I said. “I was blown up while we were eating cheese.”

“Be serious. You must have done something heroic either before or after.
Remember carefully.”

“I did not.”

“Didn’t you carry anybody on your back? Gordini says you carried several
people on your back but the medical major at the first post declares it
is impossible. He has to sign the proposition for the citation.”

“I didn’t carry anybody. I couldn’t move.”

“That doesn’t matter,” said Rinaldi.

He took off his gloves.

“I think we can get you the silver. Didn’t you refuse to be medically
aided before the others?”

“Not very firmly.”

“That doesn’t matter. Look how you are wounded. Look at your valorous
conduct in asking to go always to the first line. Besides, the operation
was successful.”

“Did they cross the river all right?”

“Enormously. They take nearly a thousand prisoners. It’s in the
bulletin. Didn’t you see it?”

“No.”

“I’ll bring it to you. It is a successful coup de main.”

“How is everything?”

“Splendid. We are all splendid. Everybody is proud of you. Tell me just
exactly how it happened. I am positive you will get the silver. Go on
tell me. Tell me all about it.” He paused and thought. “Maybe you will
get an English medal too. There was an English there. I’ll go and see
him and ask if he will recommend you. He ought to be able to do
something. Do you suffer much? Have a drink. Orderly, go get a
corkscrew. Oh you should see what I did in the removal of three metres
of small intestine and better now than ever. It is one for _The Lancet_.
You do me a translation and I will send it to _The Lancet_. Every day I
am better. Poor dear baby, how do you feel? Where is that damn
corkscrew? You are so brave and quiet I forget you are suffering.” He
slapped his gloves on the edge of the bed.

“Here is the corkscrew, Signor Tenente,” the orderly said.

“Open the bottle. Bring a glass. Drink that, baby. How is your poor
head? I looked at your papers. You haven’t any fracture. That major at
the first post was a hog-butcher. I would take you and never hurt you. I
never hurt anybody. I learn how to do it. Every day I learn to do things
smoother and better. You must forgive me for talking so much, baby. I am
very moved to see you badly wounded. There, drink that. It’s good. It
cost fifteen lire. It ought to be good. Five stars. After I leave here
I’ll go see that English and he’ll get you an English medal.”

“They don’t give them like that.”

“You are so modest. I will send the liaison officer. He can handle the
English.”

“Have you seen Miss Barkley?”

“I will bring her here. I will go now and bring her here.”

“Don’t go,” I said. “Tell me about Gorizia. How are the girls?”

“There are no girls. For two weeks now they haven’t changed them. I
don’t go there any more. It is disgraceful. They aren’t girls; they are
old war comrades.”

“You don’t go at all?”

“I just go to see if there is anything new. I stop by. They all ask for
you. It is a disgrace that they should stay so long that they become
friends.”

“Maybe girls don’t want to go to the front any more.”

“Of course they do. They have plenty of girls. It is just bad
administration. They are keeping them for the pleasure of dugout hiders
in the rear.”

“Poor Rinaldi,” I said. “All alone at the war with no new girls.”

Rinaldi poured himself another glass of the cognac.

“I don’t think it will hurt you, baby. You take it.”

I drank the cognac and felt it warm all the way down. Rinaldi poured
another glass. He was quieter now. He held up the glass. “To your
valorous wounds. To the silver medal. Tell me, baby, when you lie here
all the time in the hot weather don’t you get excited?”

“Sometimes.”

“I can’t imagine lying like that. I would go crazy.”

“You are crazy.”

“I wish you were back. No one to come in at night from adventures. No
one to make fun of. No one to lend me money. No blood brother and
roommate. Why do you get yourself wounded?”

“You can make fun of the priest.”

“That priest. It isn’t me that makes fun of him. It is the captain. I
like him. If you must have a priest have that priest. He’s coming to see
you. He makes big preparations.”

“I like him.”

“Oh, I knew it. Sometimes I think you and he are a little that way. You
know.”

“No, you don’t.”

“Yes, I do sometimes. A little that way like the number of the first
regiment of the Brigata Ancona.”

“Oh, go to hell.”

He stood up and put on his gloves.

“Oh I love to tease you, baby. With your priest and your English girl,
and really you are just like me underneath.”

“No, I’m not.”

“Yes, we are. You are really an Italian. All fire and smoke and nothing
inside. You only pretend to be American. We are brothers and we love
each other.”

“Be good while I’m gone,” I said.

“I will send Miss Barkley. You are better with her without me. You are
purer and sweeter.”

“Oh, go to hell.”

“I will send her. Your lovely cool goddess. English goddess. My God what
would a man do with a woman like that except worship her? What else is
an Englishwoman good for?”

“You are an ignorant foul-mouthed dago.”

“A what?”

“An ignorant wop.”

“Wop. You are a frozen-faced ... wop.”

“You are ignorant. Stupid.” I saw that word pricked him and kept on.
“Uninformed. Inexperienced, stupid from inexperience.”

“Truly? I tell you something about your good women. Your goddesses.
There is only one difference between taking a girl who has always been
good and a woman. With a girl it is painful. That’s all I know.” He
slapped the bed with his glove. “And you never know if the girl will
really like it.”

“Don’t get angry.”

“I’m not angry. I just tell you, baby, for your own good. To save you
trouble.”

“That’s the only difference?”

“Yes. But millions of fools like you don’t know it.”

“You were sweet to tell me.”

“We won’t quarrel, baby. I love you too much. But don’t be a fool.”

“No. I’ll be wise like you.”

“Don’t be angry, baby. Laugh. Take a drink. I must go, really.”

“You’re a good old boy.”

“Now you see. Underneath we are the same. We are war brothers. Kiss me
good-by.”

“You’re sloppy.”

“No. I am just more affectionate.”

I felt his breath come toward me. “Good-by. I come to see you again
soon.” His breath went away. “I won’t kiss you if you don’t want. I’ll
send your English girl. Good-by, baby. The cognac is under the bed. Get
well soon.”

He was gone.




                               CHAPTER XI

It was dusk when the priest came. They had brought the soup and
afterward taken away the bowls and I was lying looking at the rows of
beds and out the window at the tree-top that moved a little in the
evening breeze. The breeze came in through the window and it was cooler
with the evening. The flies were on the ceiling now and on the electric
light bulbs that hung on wires. The lights were only turned on when some
one was brought in at night or when something was being done. It made me
feel very young to have the dark come after the dusk and then remain. It
was like being put to bed after early supper. The orderly came down
between the beds and stopped. Some one was with him. It was the priest.
He stood there small, brown-faced, and embarrassed.

“How do you do?” he asked. He put some packages down by the bed, on the
floor.

“All right, father.”

He sat down in the chair that had been brought for Rinaldi and looked
out of the window embarrassedly. I noticed his face looked very tired.

“I can only stay a minute,” he said. “It is late.”

“It’s not late. How is the mess?”

He smiled. “I am still a great joke,” he sounded tired too. “Thank God
they are all well.”

“I am so glad you are all right,” he said. “I hope you don’t suffer.” He
seemed very tired and I was not used to seeing him tired.

“Not any more.”

“I miss you at the mess.”

“I wish I were there. I always enjoyed our talking.”

“I brought you a few little things,” he said. He picked up the packages.
“This is mosquito netting. This is a bottle of vermouth. You like
vermouth? These are English papers.”

“Please open them.”

He was pleased and undid them. I held the mosquito netting in my hands.
The vermouth he held up for me to see and then put it on the floor
beside the bed. I held up one of the sheaf of English papers. I could
read the headlines by turning it so the half-light from the window was
on it. It was the _News of the World_.

“The others are illustrated,” he said.

“It will be a great happiness to read them. Where did you get them?”

“I sent for them to Mestre. I will have more.”

“You were very good to come, father. Will you drink a glass of
vermouth?”

“Thank you. You keep it. It’s for you.”

“No, drink a glass.”

“All right. I will bring you more then.”

The orderly brought the glasses and opened the bottle. He broke off the
cork and the end had to be shoved down into the bottle. I could see the
priest was disappointed but he said, “That’s all right. It’s no matter.”

“Here’s to your health, father.”

“To your better health.”

Afterward he held the glass in his hand and we looked at one another.
Sometimes we talked and were good friends but to-night it was difficult.

“What’s the matter, father? You seem very tired.”

“I am tired but I have no right to be.”

“It’s the heat.”

“No. This is only the Spring. I feel very low.”

“You have the war disgust.”

“No. But I hate the war.”

“I don’t enjoy it,” I said. He shook his head and looked out of the
window.

“You do not mind it. You do not see it. You must forgive me. I know you
are wounded.”

“That is an accident.”

“Still even wounded you do not see it. I can tell. I do not see it
myself but I feel it a little.”

“When I was wounded we were talking about it. Passini was talking.”

The priest put down the glass. He was thinking about something else.

“I know them because I am like they are,” he said.

“You are different though.”

“But really I am like they are.”

“The officers don’t see anything.”

“Some of them do. Some are very delicate and feel worse than any of us.”

“They are mostly different.”

“It is not education or money. It is something else. Even if they had
education or money men like Passini would not wish to be officers. I
would not be an officer.”

“You rank as an officer. I am an officer.”

“I am not really. You are not even an Italian. You are a foreigner. But
you are nearer the officers than you are to the men.”

“What is the difference?”

“I cannot say it easily. There are people who would make war. In this
country there are many like that. There are other people who would not
make war.”

“But the first ones make them do it.”

“Yes.”

“And I help them.”

“You are a foreigner. You are a patriot.”

“And the ones who would not make war? Can they stop it?”

“I do not know.”

He looked out of the window again. I watched his face.

“Have they ever been able to stop it?”

“They are not organized to stop things and when they get organized their
leaders sell them out.”

“Then it’s hopeless?”

“It is never hopeless. But sometimes I cannot hope. I try always to hope
but sometimes I cannot.”

“Maybe the war will be over.”

“I hope so.”

“What will you do then?”

“If it is possible I will return to the Abruzzi.”

His brown face was suddenly very happy.

“You love the Abruzzi!”

“Yes, I love it very much.”

“You ought to go there then.”

“I would be too happy. If I could live there and love God and serve
Him.”

“And be respected,” I said.

“Yes and be respected. Why not?”

“No reason not. You should be respected.”

“It does not matter. But there in my country it is understood that a man
may love God. It is not a dirty joke.”

“I understand.”

He looked at me and smiled.

“You understand but you do not love God.”

“No.”

“You do not love Him at all?” he asked.

“I am afraid of him in the night sometimes.”

“You should love Him.”

“I don’t love much.”

“Yes,” he said. “You do. What you tell me about in the nights. That is
not love. That is only passion and lust. When you love you wish to do
things for. You wish to sacrifice for. You wish to serve.”

“I don’t love.”

“You will. I know you will. Then you will be happy.”

“I’m happy. I’ve always been happy.”

“It is another thing. You cannot know about it unless you have it.”

“Well,” I said. “If I ever get it I will tell you.”

“I stay too long and talk too much.” He was worried that he really did.

“No. Don’t go. How about loving women? If I really loved some woman
would it be like that?”

“I don’t know about that. I never loved any woman.”

“What about your mother?”

“Yes, I must have loved my mother.”

“Did you always love God?”

“Ever since I was a little boy.”

“Well,” I said. I did not know what to say. “You are a fine boy,” I
said.

“I am a boy,” he said. “But you call me father.”

“That’s politeness.”

He smiled.

“I must go, really,” he said. “You do not want me for anything?” he
asked hopefully.

“No. Just to talk.”

“I will take your greetings to the mess.”

“Thank you for the many fine presents.”

“Nothing.”

“Come and see me again.”

“Yes. Good-by,” he patted my hand.

“So long,” I said in dialect.

“Ciaou,” he repeated.

It was dark in the room and the orderly, who had sat by the foot of the
bed, got up and went out with him. I liked him very much and I hoped he
would get back to the Abruzzi some time. He had a rotten life in the
mess and he was fine about it but I thought how he would be in his own
country. At Capracotta, he had told me, there were trout in the stream
below the town. It was forbidden to play the flute at night. When the
young men serenaded only the flute was forbidden. Why, I had asked.
Because it was bad for the girls to hear the flute at night. The
peasants all called you “Don” and when you met them they took off their
hats. His father hunted every day and stopped to eat at the houses of
peasants. They were always honored. For a foreigner to hunt he must
present a certificate that he had never been arrested. There were bears
on the Gran Sasso D’Italia but it was a long way. Aquila was a fine
town. It was cool in the summer at night and the spring in Abruzzi was
the most beautiful in Italy. But what was lovely was the fall to go
hunting through the chestnut woods. The birds were all good because they
fed on grapes and you never took a lunch because the peasants were
always honored if you would eat with them at their houses. After a while
I went to sleep.




                              CHAPTER XII

The room was long with windows on the right-hand side and a door at the
far end that went into the dressing room. The row of beds that mine was
in faced the windows and another row, under the windows, faced the wall.
If you lay on your left side you could see the dressing room door. There
was another door at the far end that people sometimes came in by. If any
one were going to die they put a screen around the bed so you could not
see them die, but only the shoes and puttees of doctors and men nurses
showed under the bottom of the screen and sometimes at the end there
would be whispering. Then the priest would come out from behind the
screen and afterward the men nurses would go back behind the screen to
come out again carrying the one who was dead with a blanket over him
down the corridor between the beds and some one folded the screen and
took it away.

That morning the major in charge of the ward asked me if I felt that I
could travel the next day. I said I could. He said then they would ship
me out early in the morning. He said I would be better off making the
trip now before it got too hot.

When they lifted you up out of bed to carry you into the dressing room
you could look out of the window and see the new graves in the garden. A
soldier sat outside the door that opened onto the garden making crosses
and painting on them the names, rank, and regiment of the men who were
buried in the garden. He also ran errands for the ward and in his spare
time made me a cigarette lighter out of an empty Austrian rifle
cartridge. The doctors were very nice and seemed very capable. They were
anxious to ship me to Milan where there were better X-ray facilities and
where, after the operation, I could take mechano-therapy. I wanted to go
to Milan too. They wanted to get us all out and back as far as possible
because all the beds were needed for the offensive, when it should
start.

The night before I left the field hospital Rinaldi came in to see me
with the major from our mess. They said that I would go to an American
hospital in Milan that had just been installed. Some American ambulance
units were to be sent down and this hospital would look after them and
any other Americans on service in Italy. There were many in the Red
Cross. The States had declared war on Germany but not on Austria.

The Italians were sure America would declare war on Austria too and they
were very excited about any Americans coming down, even the Red Cross.
They asked me if I thought President Wilson would declare war on Austria
and I said it was only a matter of days. I did not know what we had
against Austria but it seemed logical that they should declare war on
her if they did on Germany. They asked me if we would declare war on
Turkey. I said that was doubtful. Turkey, I said, was our national bird
but the joke translated so badly and they were so puzzled and suspicious
that I said yes, we would probably declare war on Turkey. And on
Bulgaria? We had drunk several glasses of brandy and I said yes by God
on Bulgaria too and on Japan. But, they said, Japan is an ally of
England. You can’t trust the bloody English. The Japanese want Hawaii, I
said. Where is Hawaii? It is in the Pacific Ocean. Why do the Japanese
want it? They don’t really want it, I said. That is all talk. The
Japanese are a wonderful little people fond of dancing and light wines.
Like the French, said the major. We will get Nice and Savoia from the
French. We will get Corsica and all the Adriatic coast-line, Rinaldi
said. Italy will return to the splendors of Rome, said the major. I
don’t like Rome, I said. It is hot and full of fleas. You don’t like
Rome? Yes, I love Rome. Rome is the mother of nations. I will never
forget Romulus suckling the Tiber. What? Nothing. Let’s all go to Rome.
Let’s go to Rome to-night and never come back. Rome is a beautiful city,
said the major. The mother and father of nations, I said. Roma is
feminine, said Rinaldi. It cannot be the father. Who is the father,
then, the Holy Ghost? Don’t blaspheme. I wasn’t blaspheming, I was
asking for information. You are drunk, baby. Who made me drunk? I made
you drunk, said the major. I made you drunk because I love you and
because America is in the war. Up to the hilt, I said. You go away in
the morning, baby, Rinaldi said. To Rome, I said. No, to Milan. To
Milan, said the major, to the Crystal Palace, to the Cova, to Campari’s,
to Biffi’s, to the galleria. You lucky boy. To the Gran Italia I said,
where I will borrow money from George. To the Scala, said Rinaldi. You
will go to the Scala. Every night, I said. You won’t be able to afford
it every night, said the major.

The tickets are very expensive. I will draw a sight draft on my
grandfather, I said. A what? A sight draft. He has to pay or I go to
jail. Mr. Cunningham at the bank does it. I live by sight drafts. Can a
grandfather jail a patriotic grandson who is dying that Italy may live?
Live the American Garibaldi, said Rinaldi. Viva the sight drafts, I
said. We must be quiet, said the major. Already we have been asked many
times to be quiet. Do you go to-morrow really, Federico? He goes to the
American hospital I tell you, Rinaldi said. To the beautiful nurses. Not
the nurses with beards of the field hospital. Yes, yes, said the major,
I know he goes to the American hospital. I don’t mind their beards, I
said. If any man wants to raise a beard let him. Why don’t you raise a
beard, Signor Maggiore? It could not go in a gas mask. Yes it could.
Anything can go in a gas mask. I’ve vomited into a gas mask. Don’t be so
loud, baby, Rinaldi said. We all know you have been at the front. Oh,
you fine baby, what will I do while you are gone? We must go, said the
major. This becomes sentimental. Listen, I have a surprise for you. Your
English. You know? The English you go to see every night at their
hospital? She is going to Milan too. She goes with another to be at the
American hospital. They had not got nurses yet from America. I talked
to-day with the head of their riparto. They have too many women here at
the front. They send some back. How do you like that, baby? All right.
Yes? You go to live in a big city and have your English there to cuddle
you. Why don’t I get wounded? Maybe you will, I said. We must go, said
the major. We drink and make noise and disturb Federico. Don’t go. Yes,
we must go. Good-by. Good luck. Many things. Ciaou. Ciaou. Ciaou. Come
back quickly, baby. Rinaldi kissed me. You smell of lysol. Good-by,
baby. Good-by. Many things. The major patted my shoulder. They tiptoed
out. I found I was quite drunk but went to sleep.



The next day in the morning we left for Milan and arrived forty-eight
hours later. It was a bad trip. We were sidetracked for a long time this
side of Mestre and children came and peeked in. I got a little boy to go
for a bottle of cognac but he came back and said he could only get
grappa. I told him to get it and when it came I gave him the change and
the man beside me and I got drunk and slept until past Vicenza where I
woke up and was very sick on the floor. It did not matter because the
man on that side had been very sick on the floor several times before.
Afterward I thought I could not stand the thirst and in the yards
outside of Verona I called to a soldier who was walking up and down
beside the train and he got me a drink of water. I woke Georgetti, the
other boy who was drunk, and offered him some water. He said to pour it
on his shoulder and went back to sleep. The soldier would not take the
penny I offered him and brought me a pulpy orange. I sucked on that and
spit out the pith and watched the soldier pass up and down past a
freight-car outside and after a while the train gave a jerk and started.




                                BOOK II




                              CHAPTER XIII

We got into Milan early in the morning and they unloaded us in the
freight yard. An ambulance took me to the American hospital. Riding in
the ambulance on a stretcher I could not tell what part of town we were
passing through but when they unloaded the stretcher I saw a
market-place and an open wine shop with a girl sweeping out. They were
watering the street and it smelled of the early morning. They put the
stretcher down and went in. The porter came out with them. He had gray
mustaches, wore a doorman’s cap and was in his shirt sleeves. The
stretcher would not go into the elevator and they discussed whether it
was better to lift me off the stretcher and go up in the elevator or
carry the stretcher up the stairs. I listened to them discussing it.
They decided on the elevator. They lifted me from the stretcher. “Go
easy,” I said. “Take it softly.”

In the elevator we were crowded and as my legs bent the pain was very
bad. “Straighten out the legs,” I said.

“We can’t, Signor Tenente. There isn’t room.” The man who said this had
his arm around me and my arm was around his neck. His breath came in my
face metallic with garlic and red wine.

“Be gentle,” the other man said.

“Son of a bitch who isn’t gentle!”

“Be gentle I say,” the man with my feet repeated.

I saw the doors of the elevator closed, and the grill shut and the
fourth-floor button pushed by the porter. The porter looked worried. The
elevator rose slowly.

“Heavy?” I asked the man with the garlic.

“Nothing,” he said. His face was sweating and he grunted. The elevator
rose steadily and stopped. The man holding the feet opened the door and
stepped out. We were on a balcony. There were several doors with brass
knobs. The man carrying the feet pushed a button that rang a bell. We
heard it inside the doors. No one came. Then the porter came up the
stairs.

“Where are they?” the stretcher-bearers asked.

“I don’t know,” said the porter. “They sleep down stairs.”

“Get somebody.”

The porter rang the bell, then knocked on the door, then he opened the
door and went in. When he came back there was an elderly woman wearing
glasses with him. Her hair was loose and half-falling and she wore a
nurse’s dress.

“I can’t understand,” she said. “I can’t understand Italian.”

“I can speak English,” I said. “They want to put me somewhere.”

“None of the rooms are ready. There isn’t any patient expected.” She
tucked at her hair and looked at me near-sightedly.

“Show them any room where they can put me.”

“I don’t know,” she said. “There’s no patient expected. I couldn’t put
you in just any room.”

“Any room will do,” I said. Then to the porter in Italian, “Find an
empty room.”

“They are all empty,” said the porter. “You are the first patient.” He
held his cap in his hand and looked at the elderly nurse.

“For Christ’s sweet sake take me to some room.” The pain had gone on and
on with the legs bent and I could feel it going in and out of the bone.
The porter went in the door, followed by the gray-haired woman, then
came hurrying back. “Follow me,” he said. They carried me down a long
hallway and into a room with drawn blinds. It smelled of new furniture.
There was a bed and a big wardrobe with a mirror. They laid me down on
the bed.

“I can’t put on sheets,” the woman said. “The sheets are locked up.”

I did not speak to her. “There is money in my pocket,” I said to the
porter. “In the buttoned-down pocket.” The porter took out the money.
The two stretcher-bearers stood beside the bed holding their caps. “Give
them five lire apiece and five lire for yourself. My papers are in the
other pocket. You may give them to the nurse.”

The stretcher-bearers saluted and said thank you. “Good-by,” I said.
“And many thanks.” They saluted again and went out.

“Those papers,” I said to the nurse, “describe my case and the treatment
already given.”

The woman picked them up and looked at them through her glasses. There
were three papers and they were folded. “I don’t know what to do,” she
said. “I can’t read Italian. I can’t do anything without the doctor’s
orders.” She commenced to cry and put the papers in her apron pocket.
“Are you an American?” she asked crying.

“Yes. Please put the papers on the table by the bed.”

It was dim and cool in the room. As I lay on the bed I could see the big
mirror on the other side of the room but could not see what it
reflected. The porter stood by the bed. He had a nice face and was very
kind.

“You can go,” I said to him. “You can go too,” I said to the nurse.
“What is your name?”

“Mrs. Walker.”

“You can go, Mrs. Walker. I think I will go to sleep.”

I was alone in the room. It was cool and did not smell like a hospital.
The mattress was firm and comfortable and I lay without moving, hardly
breathing, happy in feeling the pain lessen. After a while I wanted a
drink of water and found the bell on a cord by the bed and rang it but
nobody came. I went to sleep.

When I woke I looked around. There was sunlight coming in through the
shutters. I saw the big armoire, the bare walls, and two chairs. My legs
in the dirty bandages, stuck straight out in the bed. I was careful not
to move them. I was thirsty and I reached for the bell and pushed the
button. I heard the door open and looked and it was a nurse. She looked
young and pretty.

“Good-morning,” I said.

“Good-morning,” she said and came over to the bed. “We haven’t been able
to get the doctor. He’s gone to Lake Como. No one knew there was a
patient coming. What’s wrong with you anyway?”

“I’m wounded. In the legs and feet and my head is hurt.”

“What’s your name?”

“Henry. Frederic Henry.”

“I’ll wash you up. But we can’t do anything to the dressings until the
doctor comes.”

“Is Miss Barkley here?”

“No. There’s no one by that name here.”

“Who was the woman who cried when I came in?”

The nurse laughed. “That’s Mrs. Walker. She was on night duty and she’d
been asleep. She wasn’t expecting any one.”

While we were talking she was undressing me, and when I was undressed,
except for the bandages, she washed me, very gently and smoothly. The
washing felt very good. There was a bandage on my head but she washed
all around the edge.

“Where were you wounded?”

“On the Isonzo north of Plava.”

“Where is that?”

“North of Gorizia.”

I could see that none of the places meant anything to her.

“Do you have a lot of pain?”

“No. Not much now.”

She put a thermometer in my mouth.

“The Italians put it under the arm,” I said.

“Don’t talk.”

When she took the thermometer out she read it and then shook it.

“What’s the temperature?”

“You’re not supposed to know that.”

“Tell me what it is.”

“It’s almost normal.”

“I never have any fever. My legs are full of old iron too.”

“What do you mean?”

“They’re full of trench-mortar fragments, old screws and bed-springs and
things.”

She shook her head and smiled.

“If you had any foreign bodies in your legs they would set up an
inflammation and you’d have fever.”

“All right,” I said. “We’ll see what comes out.”

She went out of the room and came back with the old nurse of the early
morning. Together they made the bed with me in it. That was new to me
and an admirable proceeding.

“Who is in charge here?”

“Miss Van Campen.”

“How many nurses are there?”

“Just us two.”

“Won’t there be more?”

“Some more are coming.”

“When will they get here?”

“I don’t know. You ask a great many questions for a sick boy.”

“I’m not sick,” I said, “I’m wounded.”

They had finished making the bed and I lay with a clean smooth sheet
under me and another sheet over me. Mrs. Walker went out and came back
with a pajama jacket. They put that on me and I felt very clean and
dressed.

“You’re awfully nice to me,” I said. The nurse called Miss Gage giggled.
“Could I have a drink of water?” I asked.

“Certainly. Then you can have breakfast.”

“I don’t want breakfast. Can I have the shutters opened please?”

The light had been dim in the room and when the shutters were opened it
was bright sunlight and I looked out on a balcony and beyond were the
tile roofs of houses and chimneys. I looked out over the tiled roofs and
saw white clouds and the sky very blue.

“Don’t you know when the other nurses are coming?”

“Why? Don’t we take good care of you?”

“You’re very nice.”

“Would you like to use the bedpan?”

“I might try.”

They helped me and held me up but it was not any use. Afterward I lay
and looked out the open doors onto the balcony.

“When does the doctor come?”

“When he gets back. We’ve tried to telephone to Lake Como for him.”

“Aren’t there any other doctors?”

“He’s the doctor for the hospital.”

Miss Gage brought a pitcher of water and a glass. I drank three glasses
and then they left me and I looked out the window a while and went back
to sleep. I ate some lunch and in the afternoon Miss Van Campen, the
superintendent, came up to see me. She did not like me and I did not
like her. She was small and neatly suspicious and too good for her
position. She asked many questions and seemed to think it was somewhat
disgraceful that I was with the Italians.

“Can I have wine with the meals?” I asked her.

“Only if the doctor prescribes it.”

“I can’t have it until he comes?”

“Absolutely not.”

“You plan on having him come eventually?”

“We’ve telephoned him at Lake Como.”

She went out and Miss Gage came back.

“Why were you rude to Miss Van Campen?” she asked after she had done
something for me very skilfully.

“I didn’t mean to be. But she was snooty.”

“She said you were domineering and rude.”

“I wasn’t. But what’s the idea of a hospital without a doctor?”

“He’s coming. They’ve telephoned for him to Lake Como.”

“What does he do there? Swim?”

“No. He has a clinic there.”

“Why don’t they get another doctor?”

“Hush. Hush. Be a good boy and he’ll come.”

I sent for the porter and when he came I told him in Italian to get me a
bottle of Cinzano at the wine shop, a fiasco of chianti and the evening
papers. He went away and brought them wrapped in newspaper, unwrapped
them and, when I asked him to, drew the corks and put the wine and
vermouth under the bed. They left me alone and I lay in bed and read the
papers awhile, the news from the front, and the list of dead officers
with their decorations and then reached down and brought up the bottle
of Cinzano and held it straight up on my stomach, the cool glass against
my stomach, and took little drinks making rings on my stomach from
holding the bottle there between drinks, and watched it get dark outside
over the roofs of the town. The swallows circled around and I watched
them and the night-hawks flying above the roofs and drank the Cinzano.
Miss Gage brought up a glass with some egg-nog in it. I lowered the
vermouth bottle to the other side of the bed when she came in.

“Miss Van Campen had some sherry put in this,” she said. “You shouldn’t
be rude to her. She’s not young and this hospital is a big
responsibility for her. Mrs. Walker’s too old and she’s no use to her.”

“She’s a splendid woman,” I said. “Thank her very much.”

“I’m going to bring your supper right away.”

“That’s all right,” I said. “I’m not hungry.”

When she brought the tray and put it on the bed table I thanked her and
ate a little of the supper. Afterward it was dark outside and I could
see the beams of the search-lights moving in the sky. I watched for a
while and then went to sleep. I slept heavily except once I woke
sweating and scared and then went back to sleep trying to stay outside
of my dream. I woke for good long before it was light and heard roosters
crowing and stayed on awake until it began to be light. I was tired and
once it was really light I went back to sleep again.




                              CHAPTER XIV

It was bright sunlight in the room when I woke. I thought I was back at
the front and stretched out in bed. My legs hurt me and I looked down at
them still in the dirty bandages, and seeing them knew where I was. I
reached up for the bell-cord and pushed the button. I heard it buzz down
the hall and then some one coming on rubber soles along the hall. It was
Miss Gage and she looked a little older in the bright sunlight and not
so pretty.

“Good-morning,” she said. “Did you have a good night?”

“Yes. Thanks very much,” I said. “Can I have a barber?”

“I came in to see you and you were asleep with this in the bed with
you.”

She opened the armoire door and held up the vermouth bottle. It was
nearly empty. “I put the other bottle from under the bed in there too,”
she said. “Why didn’t you ask me for a glass?”

“I thought maybe you wouldn’t let me have it.”

“I’d have had some with you.”

“You’re a fine girl.”

“It isn’t good for you to drink alone,” she said. “You mustn’t do it.”

“All right.”

“Your friend Miss Barkley’s come,” she said.

“Really?”

“Yes. I don’t like her.”

“You will like her. She’s awfully nice.”

She shook her head. “I’m sure she’s fine. Can you move just a little to
this side? That’s fine. I’ll clean you up for breakfast.” She washed me
with a cloth and soap and warm water. “Hold your shoulder up,” she said.
“That’s fine.”

“Can I have the barber before breakfast?”

“I’ll send the porter for him.” She went out and came back. “He’s gone
for him,” she said and dipped the cloth she held in the basin of water.

The barber came with the porter. He was a man of about fifty with an
upturned mustache. Miss Gage was finished with me and went out and the
barber lathered my face and shaved. He was very solemn and refrained
from talking.

“What’s the matter? Don’t you know any news?” I asked.

“What news?”

“Any news. What’s happened in the town?”

“It is time of war,” he said. “The enemy’s ears are everywhere.”

I looked up at him. “Please hold your face still,” he said and went on
shaving. “I will tell nothing.”

“What’s the matter with you?” I asked.

“I am an Italian. I will not communicate with the enemy.”

I let it go at that. If he was crazy, the sooner I could get out from
under the razor the better. Once I tried to get a good look at him.
“Beware,” he said. “The razor is sharp.”

I paid him when it was over and tipped him half a lira. He returned the
coins.

“I will not. I am not at the front. But I am an Italian.”

“Get the hell out of here.”

“With your permission,” he said and wrapped his razors in newspaper. He
went out leaving the five copper coins on the table beside the bed. I
rang the bell. Miss Gage came in. “Would you ask the porter to come
please?”

“All right.”

The porter came in. He was trying to keep from laughing.

“Is that barber crazy?”

“No, signorino. He made a mistake. He doesn’t understand very well and
he thought I said you were an Austrian officer.”

“Oh,” I said.

“Ho ho ho,” the porter laughed. “He was funny. One move from you he said
and he would have—” he drew his forefinger across his throat.

“Ho ho ho,” he tried to keep from laughing. “When I tell him you were
not an Austrian. Ho ho ho.”

“Ho ho ho,” I said bitterly. “How funny if he would cut my throat. Ho ho
ho.”

“No, signorino. No, no. He was so frightened of an Austrian. Ho ho ho.”

“Ho ho ho,” I said. “Get out of here.”

He went out and I heard him laughing in the hall. I heard some one
coming down the hallway. I looked toward the door. It was Catherine
Barkley.

She came in the room and over to the bed.

“Hello, darling,” she said. She looked fresh and young and very
beautiful. I thought I had never seen any one so beautiful.

“Hello,” I said. When I saw her I was in love with her. Everything
turned over inside of me. She looked toward the door, saw there was no
one, then she sat on the side of the bed and leaned over and kissed me.
I pulled her down and kissed her and felt her heart beating.

“You sweet,” I said. “Weren’t you wonderful to come here?”

“It wasn’t very hard. It may be hard to stay.”

“You’ve got to stay,” I said. “Oh, you’re wonderful.” I was crazy about
her. I could not believe she was really there and held her tight to me.



“You mustn’t,” she said. “You’re not well enough.”

“Yes, I am. Come on.”

“No. You’re not strong enough.”

“Yes. I am. Yes. Please.”

“You do love me?”

“I really love you. I’m crazy about you. Come on please.”

“Feel our hearts beating.”

“I don’t care about our hearts. I want you. I’m just mad about you.”

“You really love me?”

“Don’t keep on saying that. Come on. Please. Please, Catherine.”

“All right but only for a minute.”

“All right,” I said. “Shut the door.”

“You can’t. You shouldn’t.”

“Come on. Don’t talk. Please come on.”



Catherine sat in a chair by the bed. The door was open into the hall.
The wildness was gone and I felt finer than I had ever felt.

She asked, “Now do you believe I love you?”

“Oh, you’re lovely,” I said. “You’ve got to stay. They can’t send you
away. I’m crazy in love with you.”

“We’ll have to be awfully careful. That was just madness. We can’t do
that.”

“We can at night.”

“We’ll have to be awfully careful. You’ll have to be careful in front of
other people.”

“I will.”

“You’ll have to be. You’re sweet. You do love me, don’t you?”

“Don’t say that again. You don’t know what that does to me.”

“I’ll be careful then. I don’t want to do anything more to you. I have
to go now, darling, really.”

“Come back right away.”

“I’ll come when I can.”

“Good-by.”

“Good-by, sweet.”

She went out. God knows I had not wanted to fall in love with her. I had
not wanted to fall in love with any one. But God knows I had and I lay
on the bed in the room of the hospital in Milan and all sorts of things
went through my head but I felt wonderful and finally Miss Gage came in.

“The doctor’s coming,” she said. “He telephoned from Lake Como.”

“When does he get here?”

“He’ll be here this afternoon.”




                               CHAPTER XV

Nothing happened until afternoon. The doctor was a thin quiet little man
who seemed disturbed by the war. He took out a number of small steel
splinters from my thighs with delicate and refined distaste. He used a
local anæsthetic called something or other “snow,” which froze the
tissue and avoided pain until the probe, the scalpel or the forceps got
below the frozen portion. The anæsthetized area was clearly defined by
the patient and after a time the doctor’s fragile delicacy was exhausted
and he said it would be better to have an X-ray. Probing was
unsatisfactory, he said.

The X-ray was taken at the Ospedale Maggiore and the doctor who did it
was excitable, efficient and cheerful. It was arranged by holding up the
shoulders, that the patient should see personally some of the larger
foreign bodies through the machine. The plates were to be sent over. The
doctor requested me to write in his pocket notebook, my name, and
regiment and some sentiment. He declared that the foreign bodies were
ugly, nasty, brutal. The Austrians were sons of bitches. How many had I
killed? I had not killed any but I was anxious to please—and I said I
had killed plenty. Miss Gage was with me and the doctor put his arm
around her and said she was more beautiful than Cleopatra. Did she
understand that? Cleopatra the former queen of Egypt. Yes, by God she
was. We returned to the little hospital in the ambulance and after a
while and much lifting I was upstairs and in bed again. The plates came
that afternoon, the doctor had said by God he would have them that
afternoon and he did. Catherine Barkley showed them to me. They were in
red envelopes and she took them out of the envelopes and held them up to
the light and we both looked.

“That’s your right leg,” she said, then put the plate back in the
envelope. “This is your left.”

“Put them away,” I said, “and come over to the bed.”

“I can’t,” she said. “I just brought them in for a second to show you.”

She went out and I lay there. It was a hot afternoon and I was sick of
lying in bed. I sent the porter for the papers, all the papers he could
get.

Before he came back three doctors came into the room. I have noticed
that doctors who fail in the practice of medicine have a tendency to
seek one another’s company and aid in consultation. A doctor who cannot
take out your appendix properly will recommend to you a doctor who will
be unable to remove your tonsils with success. These were three such
doctors.

“This is the young man,” said the house doctor with the delicate hands.

“How do you do?” said the tall gaunt doctor with the beard. The third
doctor, who carried the X-ray plates in their red envelopes, said
nothing.

“Remove the dressings?” questioned the bearded doctor.

“Certainly. Remove the dressings, please, nurse,” the house doctor said
to Miss Gage. Miss Gage removed the dressings. I looked down at the
legs. At the field hospital they had the look of not too freshly ground
hamburger steak. Now they were crusted and the knee was swollen and
discolored and the calf sunken but there was no pus.

“Very clean,” said the house doctor. “Very clean and nice.”

“Um,” said the doctor with the beard. The third doctor looked over the
house doctor’s shoulder.

“Please move the knee,” said the bearded doctor.

“I can’t.”

“Test the articulation?” the bearded doctor questioned. He had a stripe
beside the three stars on his sleeve. That meant he was a first captain.

“Certainly,” the house doctor said. Two of them took hold of my right
leg very gingerly and bent it.

“That hurts,” I said.

“Yes. Yes. A little further, doctor.”

“That’s enough. That’s as far as it goes,” I said.

“Partial articulation,” said the first captain. He straightened up. “May
I see the plates again, please, doctor?” The third doctor handed him one
of the plates. “No. The left leg, please.”

“That is the left leg, doctor.”

“You are right. I was looking from a different angle.” He returned the
plate. The other plate he examined for some time. “You see, doctor?” he
pointed to one of the foreign bodies which showed spherical and clear
against the light. They examined the plate for some time.

“Only one thing I can say,” the first captain with the beard said. “It
is a question of time. Three months, six months probably.”

“Certainly the synovial fluid must re-form.”

“Certainly. It is a question of time. I could not conscientiously open a
knee like that before the projectile was encysted.”

“I agree with you, doctor.”

“Six months for what?” I asked.

“Six months for the projectile to encyst before the knee can be opened
safely.”

“I don’t believe it,” I said.

“Do you want to keep your knee, young man?”

“No,” I said.

“What?”

“I want it cut off,” I said, “so I can wear a hook on it.”

“What do you mean? A hook?”

“He is joking,” said the house doctor. He patted my shoulder very
delicately. “He wants to keep his knee. This is a very brave young man.
He has been proposed for the silver medal of valor.”

“All my felicitations,” said the first captain. He shook my hand. “I can
only say that to be on the safe side you should wait at least six months
before opening such a knee. You are welcome of course to another
opinion.”

“Thank you very much,” I said. “I value your opinion.”

The first captain looked at his watch.

“We must go,” he said. “All my best wishes.”

“All my best wishes and many thanks,” I said. I shook hands with the
third doctor, “Capitano Varini—Tenente Enry,” and they all three went
out of the room.

“Miss Gage,” I called. She came in. “Please ask the house doctor to come
back a minute.”

He came in holding his cap and stood by the bed. “Did you wish to see
me?”

“Yes. I can’t wait six months to be operated on. My God, doctor, did you
ever stay in bed six months?”

“You won’t be in bed all the time. You must first have the wounds
exposed to the sun. Then afterward you can be on crutches.”

“For six months and then have an operation?”

“That is the safe way. The foreign bodies must be allowed to encyst and
the synovial fluid will re-form. Then it will be safe to open up the
knee.”

“Do you really think yourself I will have to wait that long?”

“That is the safe way.”

“Who is that first captain?”

“He is a very excellent surgeon of Milan.”

“He’s a first captain, isn’t he?”

“Yes, but he is an excellent surgeon.”

“I don’t want my leg fooled with by a first captain. If he was any good
he would be made a major. I know what a first captain is, doctor.”

“He is an excellent surgeon and I would rather have his judgment than
any surgeon I know.”

“Could another surgeon see it?”

“Certainly if you wish. But I would take Dr. Varella’s opinion myself.”

“Could you ask another surgeon to come and see it?”

“I will ask Valentini to come.”

“Who is he?”

“He is a surgeon of the Ospedale Maggiore.”

“Good. I appreciate it very much. You understand, doctor, I couldn’t
stay in bed six months.”

“You would not be in bed. You would first take a sun cure. Then you
could have light exercise. Then when it was encysted we would operate.”

“But I can’t wait six months.”

The doctor spread his delicate fingers on the cap he held and smiled.
“You are in such a hurry to get back to the front?”

“Why not?”

“It is very beautiful,” he said. “You are a noble young man.” He stooped
over and kissed me very delicately on the forehead. “I will send for
Valentini. Do not worry and excite yourself. Be a good boy.”

“Will you have a drink?” I asked.

“No thank you. I never drink alcohol.”

“Just have one.” I rang for the porter to bring glasses.

“No. No thank you. They are waiting for me.”

“Good-by,” I said.

“Good-by.”



Two hours later Dr. Valentini came into the room. He was in a great
hurry and the points of his mustache stood straight up. He was a major,
his face was tanned and he laughed all the time.

“How did you do it, this rotten thing?” he asked. “Let me see the
plates. Yes. Yes. That’s it. You look healthy as a goat. Who’s the
pretty girl? Is she your girl? I thought so. Isn’t this a bloody war?
How does that feel? You are a fine boy. I’ll make you better than new.
Does that hurt? You bet it hurts. How they love to hurt you, these
doctors. What have they done for you so far? Can’t that girl talk
Italian? She should learn. What a lovely girl. I could teach her. I will
be a patient here myself. No, but I will do all your maternity work
free. Does she understand that? She will make you a fine boy. A fine
blonde like she is. That’s fine. That’s all right. What a lovely girl.
Ask her if she eats supper with me. No I won’t take her away from you.
Thank you. Thank you very much, Miss. That’s all.”

“That’s all I want to know.” He patted me on the shoulder. “Leave the
dressings off.”

“Will you have a drink, Dr. Valentini?”

“A drink? Certainly. I will have ten drinks. Where are they?”

“In the armoire. Miss Barkley will get the bottle.”

“Cheery oh. Cheery oh to you, Miss. What a lovely girl. I will bring you
better cognac than that.” He wiped his mustache.

“When do you think it can be operated on?”

“To-morrow morning. Not before. Your stomach must be emptied. You must
be washed out. I will see the old lady downstairs and leave
instructions. Good-by. I see you to-morrow. I’ll bring you better cognac
than that. You are very comfortable here. Good-by. Until to-morrow. Get
a good sleep. I’ll see you early.” He waved from the doorway, his
mustaches went straight up, his brown face was smiling. There was a star
in a box on his sleeve because he was a major.




                              CHAPTER XVI

That night a bat flew into the room through the open door that led onto
the balcony and through which we watched the night over the roofs of the
town. It was dark in our room except for the small light of the night
over the town and the bat was not frightened but hunted in the room as
though he had been outside. We lay and watched him and I do not think he
saw us because we lay so still. After he went out we saw a searchlight
come on and watched the beam move across the sky and then go off and it
was dark again. A breeze came in the night and we heard the men of the
anti-aircraft gun on the next roof talking. It was cool and they were
putting on their capes. I worried in the night about some one coming up
but Catherine said they were all asleep. Once in the night we went to
sleep and when I woke she was not there but I heard her coming along the
hall and the door opened and she came back to the bed and said it was
all right she had been downstairs and they were all asleep. She had been
outside Miss Van Campen’s door and heard her breathing in her sleep. She
brought crackers and we ate them and drank some vermouth. We were very
hungry but she said that would all have to be gotten out of me in the
morning. I went to sleep again in the morning when it was light and when
I was awake I found she was gone again. She came in looking fresh and
lovely and sat on the bed and the sun rose while I had the thermometer
in my mouth and we smelled the dew on the roofs and then the coffee of
the men at the gun on the next roof.

“I wish we could go for a walk,” Catherine said. “I’d wheel you if we
had a chair.”

“How would I get into the chair?”

“We’d do it.”

“We could go out to the park and have breakfast outdoors.” I looked out
the open doorway.

“What we’ll really do,” she said, “is get you ready for your friend Dr.
Valentini.”

“I thought he was grand.”

“I didn’t like him as much as you did. But I imagine he’s very good.”

“Come back to bed, Catherine. Please,” I said.

“I can’t. Didn’t we have a lovely night?”

“And can you be on night duty to-night?”

“I probably will. But you won’t want me.”

“Yes, I will.”

“No, you won’t. You’ve never been operated on. You don’t know how you’ll
be.”

“I’ll be all right.”

“You’ll be sick and I won’t be anything to you.”

“Come back then now.”

“No,” she said. “I have to do the chart, darling, and fix you up.”

“You don’t really love me or you’d come back again.”

“You’re such a silly boy.” She kissed me. “That’s all right for the
chart. Your temperature’s always normal. You’ve such a lovely
temperature.”

“You’ve got a lovely everything.”

“Oh no. You have the lovely temperature. I’m awfully proud of your
temperature.”

“Maybe all our children will have fine temperatures.”

“Our children will probably have beastly temperatures.”

“What do you have to do to get me ready for Valentini?”

“Not much. But quite unpleasant.”

“I wish you didn’t have to do it.”

“I don’t. I don’t want any one else to touch you. I’m silly. I get
furious if they touch you.”

“Even Ferguson?”

“Especially Ferguson and Gage and the other, what’s her name?”

“Walker?”

“That’s it. They’ve too many nurses here now. There must be some more
patients or they’ll send us away. They have four nurses now.”

“Perhaps there’ll be some. They need that many nurses. It’s quite a big
hospital.”

“I hope some will come. What would I do if they sent me away? They will
unless there are more patients.”

“I’d go too.”

“Don’t be silly. You can’t go yet. But get well quickly, darling, and we
will go somewhere.”

“And then what?”

“Maybe the war will be over. It can’t always go on.”

“I’ll get well,” I said. “Valentini will fix me.”

“He should with those mustaches. And, darling, when you’re going under
the ether just think about something else—not us. Because people get
very blabby under an anæsthetic.”

“What should I think about?”

“Anything. Anything but us. Think about your people. Or even any other
girl.”

“No.”

“Say your prayers then. That ought to create a splendid impression.”

“Maybe I won’t talk.”

“That’s true. Often people don’t talk.”

“I won’t talk.”

“Don’t brag, darling. Please don’t brag. You’re so sweet and you don’t
have to brag.”

“I won’t talk a word.”

“Now you’re bragging, darling. You know you don’t need to brag. Just
start your prayers or poetry or something when they tell you to breathe
deeply. You’ll be lovely that way and I’ll be so proud of you. I’m very
proud of you anyway. You have such a lovely temperature and you sleep
like a little boy with your arm around the pillow and think it’s me. Or
is it some other girl? Some fine Italian girl?”

“It’s you.”

“Of course it’s me. Oh I do love you and Valentini will make you a fine
leg. I’m glad I don’t have to watch it.”

“And you’ll be on night duty to-night.”

“Yes. But you won’t care.”

“You wait and see.”

“There, darling. Now you’re all clean inside and out. Tell me. How many
people have you ever loved?”

“Nobody.”

“Not me even?”

“Yes, you.”

“How many others really?”

“None.”

“How many have you—how do you say it?—stayed with?”

“None.”

“You’re lying to me.”

“Yes.”

“It’s all right. Keep right on lying to me. That’s what I want you to
do. Were they pretty?”

“I never stayed with any one.”

“That’s right. Were they very attractive?”

“I don’t know anything about it.”

“You’re just mine. That’s true and you’ve never belonged to any one
else. But I don’t care if you have. I’m not afraid of them. But don’t
tell me about them. When a man stays with a girl when does she say how
much it costs?”

“I don’t know.”

“Of course not. Does she say she loves him? Tell me that. I want to know
that.”

“Yes. If he wants her to.”

“Does he say he loves her? Tell me please. It’s important.”

“He does if he wants to.”

“But you never did? Really?”

“No.”

“Not really. Tell me the truth?”

“No,” I lied.

“You wouldn’t,” she said. “I knew you wouldn’t. Oh, I love you,
darling.”

Outside the sun was up over the roofs and I could see the points of the
cathedral with the sunlight on them. I was clean inside and outside and
waiting for the doctor.

“And that’s it?” Catherine said. “She says just what he wants her to?”

“Not always.”

“But I will. I’ll say just what you wish and I’ll do what you wish and
then you will never want any other girls, will you?” She looked at me
very happily. “I’ll do what you want and say what you want and then I’ll
be a great success, won’t I?”

“Yes.”

“What would you like me to do now that you’re all ready?”

“Come to the bed again.”

“All right. I’ll come.”

“Oh, darling, darling, darling,” I said.

“You see,” she said. “I do anything you want.”

“You’re so lovely.”

“I’m afraid I’m not very good at it yet.”

“You’re lovely.”

“I want what you want. There isn’t any me any more. Just what you want.”

“You sweet.”

“I’m good. Aren’t I good? You don’t want any other girls, do you?”

“No.”

“You see? I’m good. I do what you want.”




                              CHAPTER XVII

When I was awake after the operation I had not been away. You do not go
away. They only choke you. It is not like dying it is just a chemical
choking so you do not feel, and afterward you might as well have been
drunk except that when you throw up nothing comes but bile and you do
not feel better afterward. I saw sandbags at the end of the bed. They
were on pipes that came out of the cast. After a while I saw Miss Gage
and she said, “How is it now?”

“Better,” I said.

“He did a wonderful job on your knee.”

“How long did it take?”

“Two hours and a half.”

“Did I say anything silly?”

“Not a thing. Don’t talk. Just be quiet.”

I was sick and Catherine was right. It did not make any difference who
was on night duty.



There were three other patients in the hospital now, a thin boy in the
Red Cross from Georgia with malaria, a nice boy, also thin, from New
York, with malaria and jaundice, and a fine boy who had tried to unscrew
the fuse-cap from a combination shrapnel and high explosive shell for a
souvenir. This was a shrapnel shell used by the Austrians in the
mountains with a nose-cap which went on after the burst and exploded on
contact.

Catherine Barkley was greatly liked by the nurses because she would do
night duty indefinitely. She had quite a little work with the malaria
people, the boy who had unscrewed the nose-cap was a friend of ours and
never rang at night, unless it was necessary but between the times of
working we were together. I loved her very much and she loved me. I
slept in the daytime and we wrote notes during the day when we were
awake and sent them by Ferguson. Ferguson was a fine girl. I never
learned anything about her except that she had a brother in the
Fifty-Second Division and a brother in Mesopotamia and she was very good
to Catherine Barkley.

“Will you come to our wedding, Fergy?” I said to her once.

“You’ll never get married.”

“We will.”

“No you won’t.”

“Why not?”

“You’ll fight before you’ll marry.”

“We never fight.”

“You’ve time yet.”

“We don’t fight.”

“You’ll die then. Fight or die. That’s what people do. They don’t
marry.”

I reached for her hand. “Don’t take hold of me,” she said. “I’m not
crying. Maybe you’ll be all right you two. But watch out you don’t get
her in trouble. You get her in trouble and I’ll kill you.”

“I won’t get her in trouble.”

“Well watch out then. I hope you’ll be all right. You have a good time.”

“We have a fine time.”

“Don’t fight then and don’t get her into trouble.”

“I won’t.”

“Mind you watch out. I don’t want her with any of these war babies.”

“You’re a fine girl, Fergy.”

“I’m not. Don’t try to flatter me. How does your leg feel?”

“Fine.”

“How is your head?” She touched the top of it with her fingers. It was
sensitive like a foot that had gone to sleep. “It’s never bothered me.”

“A bump like that could make you crazy. It never bothers you?”

“No.”

“You’re a lucky young man. Have you the letter done? I’m going down.”

“It’s here,” I said.

“You ought to ask her not to do night duty for a while. She’s getting
very tired.”

“All right. I will.”

“I want to do it but she won’t let me. The others are glad to let her
have it. You might give her just a little rest.”

“All right.”

“Miss Van Campen spoke about you sleeping all the forenoons.”

“She would.”

“It would be better if you let her stay off nights a little while.”

“I want her to.”

“You do not. But if you would make her I’d respect you for it.”

“I’ll make her.”

“I don’t believe it.” She took the note and went out. I rang the bell
and in a little while Miss Gage came in.

“What’s the matter?”

“I just wanted to talk to you. Don’t you think Miss Barkley ought to go
off night duty for a while? She looks awfully tired. Why does she stay
on so long?”

Miss Gage looked at me.

“I’m a friend of yours,” she said. “You don’t have to talk to me like
that.”

“What do you mean?”

“Don’t be silly. Was that all you wanted?”

“Do you want a vermouth?”

“All right. Then I have to go.” She got out the bottle from the armoire
and brought a glass.

“You take the glass,” I said. “I’ll drink out of the bottle.”

“Here’s to you,” said Miss Gage.

“What did Van Campen say about me sleeping late in the mornings?”

“She just jawed about it. She calls you our privileged patient.”

“To hell with her.”

“She isn’t mean,” Miss Gage said. “She’s just old and cranky. She never
liked you.”

“No.”

“Well, I do. And I’m your friend. Don’t forget that.”

“You’re awfully damned nice.”

“No. I know who you think is nice. But I’m your friend. How does your
leg feel?”

“Fine.”

“I’ll bring some cold mineral water to pour over it. It must itch under
the cast. It’s hot outside.”

“You’re awful nice.”

“Does it itch much?”

“No. It’s fine.”

“I’ll fix those sandbags better.” She leaned over. “I’m your friend.”

“I know you are.”

“No you don’t. But you will some day.”

Catherine Barkley took three nights off night duty and then she came
back on again. It was as though we met again after each of us had been
away on a long journey.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

We had a lovely time that summer. When I could go out we rode in a
carriage in the park. I remember the carriage, the horse going slowly,
and up ahead the back of the driver with his varnished high hat, and
Catherine Barkley sitting beside me. If we let our hands touch, just the
side of my hand touching hers, we were excited. Afterward when I could
get around on crutches we went to dinner at Biffi’s or the Gran Italia
and sat at the tables outside on the floor of the galleria. The waiters
came in and out and there were people going by and candles with shades
on the tablecloths and after we decided that we liked the Gran Italia
best, George, the head-waiter, saved us a table. He was a fine waiter
and we let him order the meal while we looked at the people, and the
great galleria in the dusk, and each other. We drank dry white capri
iced in a bucket; although we tried many of the other wines, fresa,
barbera and the sweet white wines. They had no wine waiter because of
the war and George would smile ashamedly when I asked about wines like
fresa.

“If you imagine a country that makes a wine because it tastes like
strawberries,” he said.

“Why shouldn’t it?” Catherine asked. “It sounds splendid.”

“You try it, lady,” said George, “if you want to. But let me bring a
little bottle of margaux for the Tenente.”

“I’ll try it too, George.”

“Sir, I can’t recommend you to. It doesn’t even taste like
strawberries.”

“It might,” said Catherine. “It would be wonderful if it did.”

“I’ll bring it,” said George, “and when the Lady is satisfied I’ll take
it away.”

It was not much of a wine. As he said, it did not even taste like
strawberries. We went back to capri. One evening I was short of money
and George loaned me a hundred lire. “That’s all right, Tenente,” he
said. “I know how it is. I know how a man gets short. If you or the lady
need money I’ve always got money.”

After dinner we walked through the galleria, past the other restaurants
and the shops with their steel shutters down, and stopped at the little
place where they sold sandwiches; ham and lettuce sandwiches and anchovy
sandwiches made of very tiny brown glazed rolls and only about as long
as your finger. They were to eat in the night when we were hungry. Then
we got into an open carriage outside the galleria in front of the
cathedral and rode to the hospital. At the door of the hospital the
porter came out to help with the crutches. I paid the driver, and then
we rode upstairs in the elevator. Catherine got off at the lower floor
where the nurses lived and I went on up and went down the hall on
crutches to my room; sometimes I undressed and got into bed and
sometimes I sat out on the balcony with my leg up on another chair and
watched the swallows over the roofs and waited for Catherine. When she
came upstairs it was as though she had been away on a long trip and I
went along the hall with her on the crutches and carried the basins and
waited outside the doors, or went in with her; it depending on whether
they were friends of ours or not, and when she had done all there was to
be done we sat out on the balcony outside my room. Afterward I went to
bed and when they were all asleep and she was sure they would not call
she came in. I loved to take her hair down and she sat on the bed and
kept very still, except suddenly she would dip down to kiss me while I
was doing it, and I would take out the pins and lay them on the sheet
and it would be loose and I would watch her while she kept very still
and then take out the last two pins and it would all come down and she
would drop her head and we would both be inside of it, and it was the
feeling of inside a tent or behind a falls.

She had wonderfully beautiful hair and I would lie sometimes and watch
her twisting it up in the light that came in the open door and it shone
even in the night as water shines sometimes just before it is really
daylight. She had a lovely face and body and lovely smooth skin too. We
would be lying together and I would touch her cheeks and her forehead
and under her eyes and her chin and throat with the tips of my fingers
and say, “Smooth as piano keys,” and she would stroke my chin with her
finger and say, “Smooth as emery paper and very hard on piano keys.”

“Is it rough?”

“No, darling. I was just making fun of you.”

It was lovely in the nights and if we could only touch each other we
were happy. Besides all the big times we had many small ways of making
love and we tried putting thoughts in the other one’s head while we were
in different rooms. It seemed to work sometimes but that was probably
because we were thinking the same thing anyway.

We said to each other that we were married the first day she had come to
the hospital and we counted months from our wedding day. I wanted to be
really married but Catherine said that if we were they would send her
away and if we merely started on the formalities they would watch her
and would break us up. We would have to be married under Italian law and
the formalities were terrific. I wanted us to be married really because
I worried about having a child if I thought about it, but we pretended
to ourselves we were married and did not worry much and I suppose I
enjoyed not being married, really. I know one night we talked about it
and Catherine said, “But, darling, they’d send me away.”

“Maybe they wouldn’t.”

“They would. They’d send me home and then we would be apart until after
the war.”

“I’d come on leave.”

“You couldn’t get to Scotland and back on a leave. Besides, I won’t
leave you. What good would it do to marry now? We’re really married. I
couldn’t be any more married.”

“I only wanted to for you.”

“There isn’t any me. I’m you. Don’t make up a separate me.”

“I thought girls always wanted to be married.”

“They do. But, darling, I am married. I’m married to you. Don’t I make
you a good wife?”

“You’re a lovely wife.”

“You see, darling, I had one experience of waiting to be married.”

“I don’t want to hear about it.”

“You know I don’t love any one but you. You shouldn’t mind because some
one else loved me.”

“I do.”

“You shouldn’t be jealous of some one who’s dead when you have
everything.”

“No, but I don’t want to hear about it.”

“Poor darling. And I know you’ve been with all kinds of girls and it
doesn’t matter to me.”

“Couldn’t we be married privately some way? Then if anything happened to
me or if you had a child.”

“There’s no way to be married except by church or state. We are married
privately. You see, darling, it would mean everything to me if I had any
religion. But I haven’t any religion.”

“You gave me the Saint Anthony.”

“That was for luck. Some one gave it to me.”

“Then nothing worries you?”

“Only being sent away from you. You’re my religion. You’re all I’ve
got.”

“All right. But I’ll marry you the day you say.”

“Don’t talk as though you had to make an honest woman of me, darling.
I’m a very honest woman. You can’t be ashamed of something if you’re
only happy and proud of it. Aren’t you happy?”

“But you won’t ever leave me for some one else.”

“No, darling. I won’t ever leave you for some one else. I suppose all
sorts of dreadful things will happen to us. But you don’t have to worry
about that.”

“I don’t. But I love you so much and you did love some one else before.”

“And what happened to him?”

“He died.”

“Yes and if he hadn’t I wouldn’t have met you. I’m not unfaithful,
darling. I’ve plenty of faults but I’m very faithful. You’ll be sick of
me I’ll be so faithful.”

“I’ll have to go back to the front pretty soon.”

“We won’t think about that until you go. You see I’m happy, darling, and
we have a lovely time. I haven’t been happy for a long time and when I
met you perhaps I was nearly crazy. Perhaps I was crazy. But now we’re
happy and we love each other. Do let’s please just be happy. You are
happy, aren’t you? Is there anything I do you don’t like? Can I do
anything to please you? Would you like me to take down my hair? Do you
want to play?”

“Yes and come to bed.”

“All right. I’ll go and see the patients first.”




                              CHAPTER XIX

The summer went that way. I do not remember much about the days, except
that they were hot and that there were many victories in the papers. I
was very healthy and my legs healed quickly so that it was not very long
after I was first on crutches before I was through with them and walking
with a cane. Then I started treatments at the Ospedale Maggiore for
bending the knees, mechanical treatments, baking in a box of mirrors
with violet rays, massage, and baths. I went over there afternoons and
afterward stopped at the café and had a drink and read the papers. I did
not roam around the town; but wanted to get home to the hospital from
the café. All I wanted was to see Catherine. The rest of the time I was
glad to kill. Mostly I slept in the mornings, and in the afternoons,
sometimes, I went to the races, and late to the mechano-therapy
treatments. Sometimes I stopped in at the Anglo-American Club and sat in
a deep leather-cushioned chair in front of the window and read the
magazines. They would not let us go out together when I was off crutches
because it was unseemly for a nurse to be seen unchaperoned with a
patient who did not look as though he needed attendance, so we were not
together much in the afternoons. Although sometimes we could go out to
dinner if Ferguson went along. Miss Van Campen had accepted the status
that we were great friends because she got a great amount of work out of
Catherine. She thought Catherine came from very good people and that
prejudiced her in her favor finally. Miss Van Campen admired family very
much and came from an excellent family herself. The hospital was quite
busy, too, and that kept her occupied. It was a hot summer and I knew
many people in Milan but always was anxious to get back home to the
hospital as soon as the afternoon was over. At the front they were
advancing on the Carso, they had taken Kuk across from Plava and were
taking the Bainsizza plateau. The West front did not sound so good. It
looked as though the war were going on for a long time. We were in the
war now but I thought it would take a year to get any great amount of
troops over and train them for combat. Next year would be a bad year, or
a good year maybe. The Italians were using up an awful amount of men. I
did not see how it could go on. Even if they took all the Bainsizza and
Monte San Gabriele there were plenty of mountains beyond for the
Austrians. I had seen them. All the highest mountains were beyond. On
the Carso they were going forward but there were marshes and swamps down
by the sea. Napoleon would have whipped the Austrians on the plains. He
never would have fought them in the mountains. He would have let them
come down and whipped them around Verona. Still nobody was whipping any
one on the Western front. Perhaps wars weren’t won any more. Maybe they
went on forever. Maybe it was another Hundred Years’ War. I put the
paper back on the rack and left the club. I went down the steps
carefully and walked up the Via Manzoni. Outside the Gran Hotel I met
old Meyers and his wife getting out of a carriage. They were coming back
from the races. She was a big-busted woman in black satin. He was short
and old, with a white mustache and walked flat-footed with a cane.

“How do you do? How do you do?” She shook hands. “Hello,” said Meyers.

“How were the races?”

“Fine. They were just lovely. I had three winners.”

“How did you do?” I asked Meyers.

“All right. I had a winner.”

“I never know how he does,” Mrs. Meyers said. “He never tells me.”

“I do all right,” Meyers said. He was being cordial. “You ought to come
out.” While he talked you had the impression that he was not looking at
you or that he mistook you for some one else.

“I will,” I said.

“I’m coming up to the hospital to see you,” Mrs. Meyers said. “I have
some things for my boys. You’re all my boys. You certainly are my dear
boys.”

“They’ll be glad to see you.”

“Those dear boys. You too. You’re one of my boys.”

“I have to get back,” I said.

“You give my love to all those dear boys. I’ve got lots of things to
bring. I’ve some fine Marsala and cakes.”

“Good-by,” I said. “They’ll be awfully glad to see you.”

“Good-by,” said Meyers. “You come around to the galleria. You know where
my table is. We’re all there every afternoon.” I went on up the street.
I wanted to buy something at the Cova to take to Catherine. Inside, at
the Cova, I bought a box of chocolate and while the girl wrapped it up I
walked over to the bar. There were a couple of British and some
aviators. I had a martini alone, paid for it, picked up the box of
chocolate at the outside counter and walked on home toward the hospital.
Outside the little bar up the street from the Scala there were some
people I knew, a vice-consul, two fellows who studied singing, and
Ettore Moretti, an Italian from San Francisco who was in the Italian
army. I had a drink with them. One of the singers was named Ralph
Simmons, and he was singing under the name of Enrico DelCredo. I never
knew how well he could sing but he was always on the point of something
very big happening. He was fat and looked shopworn around the nose and
mouth as though he had hayfever. He had come back from singing in
Piacenza. He had sung Tosca and it had been wonderful.

“Of course you’ve never heard me sing,” he said.

“When will you sing here?”

“I’ll be at the Scala in the fall.”

“I’ll bet they throw the benches at you,” Ettore said. “Did you hear how
they threw the benches at him in Modena?”

“It’s a damned lie.”

“They threw the benches at him,” Ettore said. “I was there. I threw six
benches myself.”

“You’re just a wop from Frisco.”

“He can’t pronounce Italian,” Ettore said. “Everywhere he goes they
throw the benches at him.”

“Piacenza’s the toughest house to sing in the north of Italy,” the other
tenor said. “Believe me that’s a tough little house to sing.” This
tenor’s name was Edgar Saunders, and he sang under the name of Edouardo
Giovanni.

“I’d like to be there to see them throw the benches at you,” Ettore
said. “You can’t sing Italian.”

“He’s a nut,” said Edgar Saunders. “All he knows how to say is throw
benches.”

“That’s all they know how to do when you two sing,” Ettore said. “Then
when you go to America you’ll tell about your triumphs at the Scala.
They wouldn’t let you get by the first note at the Scala.”

“I’ll sing at the Scala,” Simmons said. “I’m going to sing Tosca in
October.”

“We’ll go, won’t we, Mac?” Ettore said to the vice-consul. “They’ll need
somebody to protect them.”

“Maybe the American army will be there to protect them,” the vice-consul
said. “Do you want another drink, Simmons? You want a drink, Saunders?”

“All right,” said Saunders.

“I hear you’re going to get the silver medal,” Ettore said to me. “What
kind of citation you going to get?”

“I don’t know. I don’t know I’m going to get it.”

“You’re going to get it. Oh boy, the girls at the Cova will think you’re
fine then. They’ll all think you killed two hundred Austrians or
captured a whole trench by yourself. Believe me, I got to work for my
decorations.”

“How many have you got, Ettore?” asked the vice-consul.

“He’s got everything,” Simmons said. “He’s the boy they’re running the
war for.”

“I’ve got the bronze twice and three silver medals,” said Ettore. “But
the papers on only one have come through.”

“What’s the matter with the others?” asked Simmons.

“The action wasn’t successful,” said Ettore. “When the action isn’t
successful they hold up all the medals.”

“How many times have you been wounded, Ettore?”

“Three times bad. I got three wound stripes. See?” He pulled his sleeve
around. The stripes were parallel silver lines on a black background
sewed to the cloth of the sleeve about eight inches below the shoulder.

“You got one too,” Ettore said to me. “Believe me they’re fine to have.
I’d rather have them than medals. Believe me, boy, when you get three
you’ve got something. You only get one for a wound that puts you three
months in the hospital.”

“Where were you wounded, Ettore?” asked the vice-consul.

Ettore pulled up his sleeve. “Here,” he showed the deep smooth red scar.
“Here on my leg. I can’t show you that because I got puttees on; and in
the foot. There’s dead bone in my foot that stinks right now. Every
morning I take new little pieces out and it stinks all the time.”

“What hit you?” asked Simmons.

“A hand-grenade. One of those potato mashers. It just blew the whole
side of my foot off. You know those potato mashers?” He turned to me.

“Sure.”

“I saw the son of a bitch throw it,” Ettore said. “It knocked me down
and I thought I was dead all right but those damn potato mashers haven’t
got anything in them. I shot the son of a bitch with my rifle. I always
carry a rifle so they can’t tell I’m an officer.”

“How did he look?” asked Simmons.

“That was the only one he had,” Ettore said. “I don’t know why he threw
it. I guess he always wanted to throw one. He never saw any real
fighting probably. I shot the son of a bitch all right.”

“How did he look when you shot him?” Simmons asked.

“Hell, how should I know,” said Ettore. “I shot him in the belly. I was
afraid I’d miss him if I shot him in the head.”

“How long have you been an officer, Ettore?” I asked.

“Two years. I’m going to be a captain. How long have you been a
lieutenant?”

“Going on three years.”

“You can’t be a captain because you don’t know the Italian language well
enough,” Ettore said. “You can talk but you can’t read and write well
enough. You got to have an education to be a captain. Why don’t you go
in the American army?”

“Maybe I will.”

“I wish to God I could. Oh, boy, how much does a captain get, Mac?”

“I don’t know exactly. Around two hundred and fifty dollars, I think.”

“Jesus Christ what I could do with two hundred and fifty dollars. You
better get in the American army quick, Fred. See if you can’t get me
in.”

“All right.”

“I can command a company in Italian. I could learn it in English easy.”

“You’d be a general,” said Simmons.

“No, I don’t know enough to be a general. A general’s got to know a hell
of a lot. You guys think there ain’t anything to war. You ain’t got
brains enough to be a second-class corporal.”

“Thank God I don’t have to be,” Simmons said.

“Maybe you will if they round up all you slackers. Oh, boy, I’d like to
have you two in my platoon. Mac too. I’d make you my orderly, Mac.”

“You’re a great boy, Ettore,” Mac said. “But I’m afraid you’re a
militarist.”

“I’ll be a colonel before the war’s over,” Ettore said.

“If they don’t kill you.”

“They won’t kill me.” He touched the stars at his collar with his thumb
and forefinger. “See me do that? We always touch our stars if anybody
mentions getting killed.”

“Let’s go, Sim,” said Saunders standing up.

“All right.”

“So long,” I said. “I have to go too.” It was a quarter to six by the
clock inside the bar. “Ciaou, Ettore.”

“Ciaou, Fred,” said Ettore. “That’s pretty fine you’re going to get the
silver medal.”

“I don’t know I’ll get it.”

“You’ll get it all right, Fred. I heard you were going to get it all
right.”

“Well, so long,” I said. “Keep out of trouble, Ettore.”

“Don’t worry about me. I don’t drink and I don’t run around. I’m no
boozer and whorehound. I know what’s good for me.”

“So long,” I said. “I’m glad you’re going to be promoted captain.”

“I don’t have to wait to be promoted. I’m going to be a captain for
merit of war. You know. Three stars with the crossed swords and crown
above. That’s me.”

“Good luck.”

“Good luck. When you going back to the front?”

“Pretty soon.”

“Well, I’ll see you around.”

“So long.”

“So long. Don’t take any bad nickels.”

I walked on down a back street that led to a cross-cut to the hospital.
Ettore was twenty-three. He had been brought up by an uncle in San
Francisco and was visiting his father and mother in Torino when war was
declared. He had a sister, who had been sent to America with him at the
same time to live with the uncle, who would graduate from normal school
this year. He was a legitimate hero who bored every one he met.
Catherine could not stand him.

“We have heroes too,” she said. “But usually, darling, they’re much
quieter.”

“I don’t mind him.”

“I wouldn’t mind him if he wasn’t so conceited and didn’t bore me, and
bore me, and bore me.”

“He bores me.”

“You’re sweet to say so, darling. But you don’t need to. You can picture
him at the front and you know he’s useful but he’s so much the type of
boy I don’t care for.”

“I know.”

“You’re awfully sweet to know, and I try and like him but he’s a
dreadful, dreadful boy really.”

“He said this afternoon he was going to be a captain.”

“I’m glad,” said Catherine. “That should please him.”

“Wouldn’t you like me to have some more exalted rank?”

“No, darling. I only want you to have enough rank so that we’re admitted
to the better restaurants.”

“That’s just the rank I have.”

“You have a splendid rank. I don’t want you to have any more rank. It
might go to your head. Oh, darling, I’m awfully glad you’re not
conceited. I’d have married you even if you were conceited but it’s very
restful to have a husband who’s not conceited.”

We were talking softly out on the balcony. The moon was supposed to rise
but there was a mist over the town and it did not come up and in a
little while it started to drizzle and we came in. Outside the mist
turned to rain and in a little while it was raining hard and we heard it
drumming on the roof. I got up and stood at the door to see if it was
raining in but it wasn’t, so I left the door open.

“Who else did you see?” Catherine asked.

“Mr. and Mrs. Meyers.”

“They’re a strange lot.”

“He’s supposed to have been in the penitentiary at home. They let him
out to die.”

“And he lived happily in Milan forever after.”

“I don’t know how happily.”

“Happily enough after jail I should think.”

“She’s bringing some things here.”

“She brings splendid things. Were you her dear boy?”

“One of them.”

“You are all her dear boys,” Catherine said. “She prefers the dear boys.
Listen to it rain.”

“It’s raining hard.”

“And you’ll always love me, won’t you?”

“Yes.”

“And the rain won’t make any difference?”

“No.”

“That’s good. Because I’m afraid of the rain.”

“Why?” I was sleepy. Outside the rain was falling steadily.

“I don’t know, darling. I’ve always been afraid of the rain.”

“I like it.”

“I like to walk in it. But it’s very hard on loving.”

“I’ll love you always.”

“I’ll love you in the rain and in the snow and in the hail and—what
else is there?”

“I don’t know. I guess I’m sleepy.”

“Go to sleep, darling, and I’ll love you no matter how it is.”

“You’re not really afraid of the rain are you?”

“Not when I’m with you.”

“Why are you afraid of it?”

“I don’t know.”

“Tell me.”

“Don’t make me.”

“Tell me.”

“No.”

“Tell me.”

“All right. I’m afraid of the rain because sometimes I see me dead in
it.”

“No.”

“And sometimes I see you dead in it.”

“That’s more likely.”

“No it’s not, darling. Because I can keep you safe. I know I can. But
nobody can help themselves.”

“Please stop it. I don’t want you to get Scotch and crazy to-night. We
won’t be together much longer.”

“No, but I am Scotch and crazy. But I’ll stop it. It’s all nonsense.”

“Yes it’s all nonsense.”

“It’s all nonsense. It’s only nonsense. I’m not afraid of the rain. I’m
not afraid of the rain. Oh, oh, God, I wish I wasn’t.” She was crying. I
comforted her and she stopped crying. But outside it kept on raining.




                               CHAPTER XX

One day in the afternoon we went to the races. Ferguson went too and
Crowell Rodgers, the boy who had been wounded in the eyes by the
explosion of the shell nose-cap. The girls dressed to go after lunch
while Crowell and I sat on the bed in his room and read the past
performances of the horses and the predictions in the racing paper.
Crowell’s head was bandaged and he did not care much about these races
but read the racing paper constantly and kept track of all the horses
for something to do. He said the horses were a terrible lot but they
were all the horses we had. Old Meyers liked him and gave him tips.
Meyers won on nearly every race but disliked to give tips because it
brought down the prices. The racing was very crooked. Men who had been
ruled off the turf everywhere else were racing in Italy. Meyers’
information was good but I hated to ask him because sometimes he did not
answer, and always you could see it hurt him to tell you, but he felt
obligated to tell us for some reason and he hated less to tell Crowell.
Crowell’s eyes had been hurt, one was hurt badly, and Meyers had trouble
with his eyes and so he liked Crowell. Meyers never told his wife what
horses he was playing and she won or lost, mostly lost, and talked all
the time.

We four drove out to San Siro in an open carriage. It was a lovely day
and we drove out through the park and out along the tramway and out of
town where the road was dusty. There were villas with iron fences and
big overgrown gardens and ditches with water flowing and green vegetable
gardens with dust on the leaves. We could look across the plain and see
farmhouses and the rich green farms with their irrigation ditches and
the mountains to the north. There were many carriages going into the
race track and the men at the gate let us in without cards because we
were in uniform. We left the carriage, bought programmes, and walked
across the infield and then across the smooth thick turf of the course
to the paddock. The grand stands were old and made of wood and the
betting booths were under the stands and in a row out near the stables.
There was a crowd of soldiers along the fence in the infield. The
paddock was fairly well filled with people and they were walking the
horses around in a ring under the trees behind the grand-stand. We saw
people we knew and got chairs for Ferguson and Catherine and watched the
horses.

They went around, one after the other, their heads down, the grooms
leading them. One horse, a purplish black, Crowell swore was dyed that
color. We watched him and it seemed possible. He had only come out just
before the bell rang to saddle. We looked him up in the programme from
the number on the groom’s arm and it was listed a black gelding named
Japalac. The race was for horses that had never won a race worth one
thousand lire or more. Catherine was sure his color had been changed.
Ferguson said she could not tell. I thought he looked suspicious. We all
agreed we ought to back him and pooled one hundred lire. The odds sheets
showed he would pay thirty-five to one. Crowell went over and bought the
tickets while we watched the jockeys ride around once more and then go
out under the trees to the track and gallop slowly up to the turn where
the start was to be.

We went up in the grand-stand to watch the race. They had no elastic
barrier at San Siro then and the starter lined up all the horses, they
looked very small way up the track, and then sent them off with a crack
of his long whip. They came past us with the black horse well in front
and on the turn he was running away from the others. I watched them on
the far side with the glasses and saw the jockey fighting to hold him in
but he could not hold him and when they came around the turn and into
the stretch the black horse was fifteen lengths ahead of the others. He
went way on up and around the turn after the finish.

“Isn’t it wonderful,” Catherine said. “We’ll have over three thousand
lire. He must be a splendid horse.”

“I hope his color doesn’t run,” Crowell said, “before they pay off.”

“He was really a lovely horse,” Catherine said. “I wonder if Mr. Meyers
backed him.”

“Did you have the winner?” I called to Meyers. He nodded.

“I didn’t,” Mrs. Meyers said. “Who did you children bet on?”

“Japalac.”

“Really? He’s thirty-five to one!”

“We liked his color.”

“I didn’t. I thought he looked seedy. They told me not to back him.”

“He won’t pay much,” Meyers said.

“He’s marked thirty-five to one in the quotes,” I said.

“He won’t pay much. At the last minute,” Meyers said, “they put a lot of
money on him.”

“Who?”

“Kempton and the boys. You’ll see. He won’t pay two to one.”

“Then we won’t get three thousand lire,” Catherine said. “I don’t like
this crooked racing!”

“We’ll get two hundred lire.”

“That’s nothing. That doesn’t do us any good. I thought we were going to
get three thousand.”

“It’s crooked and disgusting,” Ferguson said.

“Of course,” said Catherine, “if it hadn’t been crooked we’d never have
backed him at all. But I would have liked the three thousand lire.”

“Let’s go down and get a drink and see what they pay,” Crowell said. We
went out to where they posted the numbers and the bell rang to pay off
and they put up 18.50 after Japalac to win. That meant he paid less than
even money on a ten-lira bet.

We went to the bar under the grand stand and had a whiskey and soda
apiece. We ran into a couple of Italians we knew and McAdams, the
vice-consul, and they came up with us when we joined the girls. The
Italians were full of manners and McAdams talked to Catherine while we
went down to bet again. Mr. Meyers was standing near the pari-mutual.

“Ask him what he played,” I said to Crowell.

“What are you on, Mr. Meyers?” Crowell asked. Meyers took out his
programme and pointed to the number five with his pencil.

“Do you mind if we play him too?” Crowell asked.

“Go ahead. Go ahead. But don’t tell my wife I gave it to you.”

“Will you have a drink?” I asked.

“No thanks. I never drink.”

We put a hundred lire on number five to win and a hundred to place and
then had another whiskey and soda apiece. I was feeling very good and we
picked up a couple more Italians, who each had a drink with us, and went
back to the girls. These Italians were also very mannered and matched
manners with the two we had collected before. In a little while no one
could sit down. I gave the tickets to Catherine.

“What horse is it?”

“I don’t know. Mr. Meyers’ choice.”

“Don’t you even know the name?”

“No. You can find it on the programme. Number five I think.”

“You have touching faith,” she said. The number five won but did not pay
anything. Mr. Meyers was angry.

“You have to put up two hundred lire to make twenty,” he said. “Twelve
lire for ten. It’s not worth it. My wife lost twenty lire.”

“I’ll go down with you,” Catherine said to me. The Italians all stood
up. We went downstairs and out to the paddock.

“Do you like this?” Catherine asked.

“Yes. I guess I do.”

“It’s all right, I suppose,” she said. “But, darling, I can’t stand to
see so many people.”

“We don’t see many.”

“No. But those Meyers and the man from the bank with his wife and
daughters——”

“He cashes my sight drafts,” I said.

“Yes but some one else would if he didn’t. Those last four boys were
awful.”

“We can stay out here and watch the race from the fence.”

“That will be lovely. And, darling, let’s back a horse we’ve never heard
of and that Mr. Meyers won’t be backing.”

“All right.”

We backed a horse named Light For Me that finished fourth in a field of
five. We leaned on the fence and watched the horses go by, their hoofs
thudding as they went past, and saw the mountains off in the distance
and Milan beyond the trees and the fields.

“I feel so much cleaner,” Catherine said. The horses were coming back,
through the gate, wet and sweating, the jockeys quieting them and riding
up to dismount under the trees.

“Wouldn’t you like a drink? We could have one out here and see the
horses.”

“I’ll get them,” I said.

“The boy will bring them,” Catherine said. She put her hand up and the
boy came out from the Pagoda bar beside the stables. We sat down at a
round iron table.

“Don’t you like it better when we’re alone?”

“Yes,” I said.

“I felt very lonely when they were all there.”

“It’s grand here,” I said.

“Yes. It’s really a pretty course.”

“It’s nice.”

“Don’t let me spoil your fun, darling. I’ll go back whenever you want.”

“No,” I said. “We’ll stay here and have our drink. Then we’ll go down
and stand at the water jump for the steeplechase.”

“You’re awfully good to me,” she said.

After we had been alone awhile we were glad to see the others again. We
had a good time.




                              CHAPTER XXI

In September the first cool nights came, then the days were cool and the
leaves on the trees in the park began to turn color and we knew the
summer was gone. The fighting at the front went very badly and they
could not take San Gabriele. The fighting on the Bainsizza plateau was
over and by the middle of the month the fighting for San Gabriele was
about over too. They could not take it. Ettore was gone back to the
front. The horses were gone to Rome and there was no more racing.
Crowell had gone to Rome too, to be sent back to America. There were
riots twice in the town against the war and bad rioting in Turin. A
British major at the club told me the Italians had lost one hundred and
fifty thousand men on the Bainsizza plateau and on San Gabriele. He said
they had lost forty thousand on the Carso besides. We had a drink and he
talked. He said the fighting was over for the year down here and that
the Italians had bitten off more than they could chew. He said the
offensive in Flanders was going to the bad. If they killed men as they
did this fall the Allies would be cooked in another year. He said we
were all cooked but we were all right as long as we did not know it. We
were all cooked. The thing was not to recognize it. The last country to
realize they were cooked would win the war. We had another drink. Was I
on somebody’s staff? No. He was. It was all balls. We were alone in the
club sitting back in one of the big leather sofas. His boots were
smoothly polished dull leather. They were beautiful boots. He said it
was all balls. They thought only in divisions and man-power. They all
squabbled about divisions and only killed them when they got them. They
were all cooked. The Germans won the victories. By God they were
soldiers. The old Hun was a soldier. But they were cooked too. We were
all cooked. I asked about Russia. He said they were cooked already. I’d
soon see they were cooked. Then the Austrians were cooked too. If they
got some Hun divisions they could do it. Did he think they would attack
this fall? Of course they would. The Italians were cooked. Everybody
knew they were cooked. The old Hun would come down through the Trentino
and cut the railway at Vicenza and then where would the Italians be?
They tried that in ’sixteen, I said. Not with Germans. Yes, I said. But
they probably wouldn’t do that, he said. It was too simple. They’d try
something complicated and get royally cooked. I had to go, I said. I had
to get back to the hospital. “Good-by,” he said. Then cheerily, “Every
sort of luck!” There was a great contrast between his world pessimism
and personal cheeriness.

I stopped at a barber shop and was shaved and went home to the hospital.
My leg was as well as it would get for a long time. I had been up for
examination three days before. There were still some treatments to take
before my course at the Ospedale Maggiore was finished and I walked
along the side street practising not limping. An old man was cutting
silhouettes under an arcade. I stopped to watch him. Two girls were
posing and he cut their silhouettes together, snipping very fast and
looking at them, his head on one side. The girls were giggling. He
showed me the silhouettes before he pasted them on white paper and
handed them to the girls.

“They’re beautiful,” he said. “How about you, Tenente?”

The girls went away looking at their silhouettes and laughing. They were
nice-looking girls. One of them worked in the wine shop across from the
hospital.

“All right,” I said.

“Take your cap off.”

“No. With it on.”

“It will not be so beautiful,” the old man said. “But,” he brightened,
“it will be more military.”

He snipped away at the black paper, then separated the two thicknesses
and pasted the profiles on a card and handed them to me.

“How much?”

“That’s all right.” He waved his hand. “I just made them for you.”

“Please.” I brought out some coppers. “For pleasure.”

“No. I did them for a pleasure. Give them to your girl.”

“Many thanks until we meet.”

“Until I see thee.”

I went on to the hospital. There were some letters, an official one, and
some others. I was to have three weeks’ convalescent leave and then
return to the front. I read it over carefully. Well, that was that. The
convalescent leave started October fourth when my course was finished.
Three weeks was twenty-one days. That made October twenty-fifth. I told
them I would not be in and went to the restaurant a little way up the
street from the hospital for supper and read my letters and the
_Corriere Della Sera_ at the table. There was a letter from my
grandfather, containing family news, patriotic encouragement, a draft
for two hundred dollars, and a few clippings; a dull letter from the
priest at our mess, a letter from a man I knew who was flying with the
French and had gotten in with a wild gang and was telling about it, and
a note from Rinaldi asking me how long I was going to skulk in Milano
and what was all the news? He wanted me to bring him phonograph records
and enclosed a list. I drank a small bottle of chianti with the meal,
had a coffee afterward with a glass of cognac, finished the paper, put
my letters in my pocket, left the paper on the table with the tip and
went out. In my room at the hospital I undressed, put on pajamas and a
dressing-gown, pulled down the curtains on the door that opened onto the
balcony and sitting up in bed read Boston papers from a pile Mrs. Meyers
had left for her boys at the hospital. The Chicago White Sox were
winning the American League pennant and the New York Giants were leading
the National League. Babe Ruth was a pitcher then playing for Boston.
The papers were dull, the news was local and stale, and the war news was
all old. The American news was all training camps. I was glad I wasn’t
in a training camp. The baseball news was all I could read and I did not
have the slightest interest in it. A number of papers together made it
impossible to read with interest. It was not very timely but I read at
it for a while. I wondered if America really got into the war, if they
would close down the major leagues. They probably wouldn’t. There was
still racing in Milan and the war could not be much worse. They had
stopped racing in France. That was where our horse Japalac came from.
Catherine was not due on duty until nine o’clock. I heard her passing
along the floor when she first came on duty and once saw her pass in the
hall. She went to several other rooms and finally came into mine.

“I’m late, darling,” she said. “There was a lot to do. How are you?”

I told her about my papers and the leave.

“That’s lovely,” she said. “Where do you want to go?”

“Nowhere. I want to stay here.”

“That’s silly. You pick a place to go and I’ll come too.”

“How will you work it?”

“I don’t know. But I will.”

“You’re pretty wonderful.”

“No I’m not. But life isn’t hard to manage when you’ve nothing to lose.”

“How do you mean?”

“Nothing. I was only thinking how small obstacles seemed that once were
so big.”

“I should think it might be hard to manage.”

“No it won’t, darling. If necessary I’ll simply leave. But it won’t come
to that.”

“Where should we go?”

“I don’t care. Anywhere you want. Anywhere we don’t know people.”

“Don’t you care where we go?”

“No. I’ll like any place.”

She seemed upset and taut.

“What’s the matter, Catherine?”

“Nothing. Nothing’s the matter.”

“Yes there is.”

“No nothing. Really nothing.”

“I know there is. Tell me, darling. You can tell me.”

“It’s nothing.”

“Tell me.”

“I don’t want to. I’m afraid I’ll make you unhappy or worry you.”

“No it won’t.”

“You’re sure? It doesn’t worry me but I’m afraid to worry you.”

“It won’t if it doesn’t worry you.”

“I don’t want to tell.”

“Tell it.”

“Do I have to?”

“Yes.”

“I’m going to have a baby, darling. It’s almost three months along.
You’re not worried, are you? Please please don’t. You mustn’t worry.”

“All right.”

“Is it all right?”

“Of course.”

“I did everything. I took everything but it didn’t make any difference.”

“I’m not worried.”

“I couldn’t help it, darling, and I haven’t worried about it. You
mustn’t worry or feel badly.”

“I only worry about you.”

“That’s it. That’s what you mustn’t do. People have babies all the time.
Everybody has babies. It’s a natural thing.”

“You’re pretty wonderful.”

“No I’m not. But you mustn’t mind, darling. I’ll try and not make
trouble for you. I know I’ve made trouble now. But haven’t I been a good
girl until now? You never knew it, did you?”

“No.”

“It will all be like that. You simply mustn’t worry. I can see you’re
worrying. Stop it. Stop it right away. Wouldn’t you like a drink,
darling? I know a drink always makes you feel cheerful.”

“No. I feel cheerful. And you’re pretty wonderful.”

“No I’m not. But I’ll fix everything to be together if you pick out a
place for us to go. It ought to be lovely in October. We’ll have a
lovely time, darling, and I’ll write you every day while you’re at the
front.”

“Where will you be?”

“I don’t know yet. But somewhere splendid. I’ll look after all that.”

We were quiet awhile and did not talk. Catherine was sitting on the bed
and I was looking at her but we did not touch each other. We were apart
as when some one comes into a room and people are self-conscious. She
put out her hand and took mine.

“You aren’t angry are you, darling?”

“No.”

“And you don’t feel trapped?”

“Maybe a little. But not by you.”

“I didn’t mean by me. You mustn’t be stupid. I meant trapped at all.”

“You always feel trapped biologically.”

She went away a long way without stirring or removing her hand.

“‘Always’ isn’t a pretty word.”

“I’m sorry.”

“It’s all right. But you see I’ve never had a baby and I’ve never even
loved any one. And I’ve tried to be the way you wanted and then you talk
about ‘always.’”

“I could cut off my tongue,” I offered.

“Oh, darling!” she came back from wherever she had been. “You mustn’t
mind me.” We were both together again and the self-consciousness was
gone. “We really are the same one and we mustn’t misunderstand on
purpose.”

“We won’t.”

“But people do. They love each other and they misunderstand on purpose
and they fight and then suddenly they aren’t the same one.”

“We won’t fight.”

“We mustn’t. Because there’s only us two and in the world there’s all
the rest of them. If anything comes between us we’re gone and then they
have us.”

“They won’t get us,” I said. “Because you’re too brave. Nothing ever
happens to the brave.”

“They die of course.”

“But only once.”

“I don’t know. Who said that?”

“The coward dies a thousand deaths, the brave but one?”

“Of course. Who said it?”

“I don’t know.”

“He was probably a coward,” she said. “He knew a great deal about
cowards but nothing about the brave. The brave dies perhaps two thousand
deaths if he’s intelligent. He simply doesn’t mention them.”

“I don’t know. It’s hard to see inside the head of the brave.”

“Yes. That’s how they keep that way.”

“You’re an authority.”

“You’re right, darling. That was deserved.”

“You’re brave.”

“No,” she said. “But I would like to be.”

“I’m not,” I said, “I know where I stand. I’ve been out long enough to
know. I’m like a ball-player that bats two hundred and thirty and knows
he’s no better.”

“What is a ball-player that bats two hundred and thirty? It’s awfully
impressive.”

“It’s not. It means a mediocre hitter in baseball.”

“But still a hitter,” she prodded me.

“I guess we’re both conceited,” I said. “But you are brave.”

“No. But I hope to be.”

“We’re both brave,” I said. “And I’m very brave when I’ve had a drink.”

“We’re splendid people,” Catherine said. She went over to the armoire
and brought me the cognac and a glass. “Have a drink, darling,” she
said. “You’ve been awfully good.”

“I don’t really want one.”

“Take one.”

“All right.” I poured the water glass a third full of cognac and drank
it off.

“That was very big,” she said. “I know brandy is for heroes. But you
shouldn’t exaggerate.”

“Where will we live after the war?”

“In an old people’s home probably,” she said. “For three years I looked
forward very childishly to the war ending at Christmas. But now I look
forward till when our son will be a lieutenant commander.”

“Maybe he’ll be a general.”

“If it’s an hundred years’ war he’ll have time to try both of the
services.”

“Don’t you want a drink?”

“No. It always makes you happy, darling, and it only makes me dizzy.”

“Didn’t you ever drink brandy?”

“No, darling. I’m a very old-fashioned wife.”

I reached down to the floor for the bottle and poured another drink.

“I’d better go to have a look at your compatriots,” Catherine said.
“Perhaps you’ll read the papers until I come back.”

“Do you have to go?”

“Now or later.”

“All right. Now.”

“I’ll come back later.”

“I’ll have finished the papers,” I said.




                              CHAPTER XXII

It turned cold that night and the next day it was raining. Coming home
from the Ospedale Maggiore it rained very hard and I was wet when I came
in. Up in my room the rain was coming down heavily outside on the
balcony, and the wind blew it against the glass doors. I changed my
clothing and drank some brandy but the brandy did not taste good. I felt
sick in the night and in the morning after breakfast I was nauseated.

“There is no doubt about it,” the house surgeon said. “Look at the
whites of his eyes, Miss.”

Miss Gage looked. They had me look in a glass. The whites of the eyes
were yellow and it was the jaundice. I was sick for two weeks with it.
For that reason we did not spend a convalescent leave together. We had
planned to go to Pallanza on Lago Maggiore. It is nice there in the fall
when the leaves turn. There are walks you can take and you can troll for
trout in the lake. It would have been better than Stresa because there
are fewer people at Pallanza. Stresa is so easy to get to from Milan
that there are always people you know. There is a nice village at
Pallanza and you can row out to the islands where the fishermen live and
there is a restaurant on the biggest island. But we did not go.

One day while I was in bed with jaundice Miss Van Campen came in the
room, opened the door into the armoire and saw the empty bottles there.
I had sent a load of them down by the porter and I believe she must have
seen them going out and come up to find some more. They were mostly
vermouth bottles, marsala bottles, capri bottles, empty chianti flasks
and a few cognac bottles. The porter had carried out the large bottles,
those that had held vermouth, and the straw-covered chianti flasks, and
left the brandy bottles for the last. It was the brandy bottles and a
bottle shaped like a bear, which had held kümmel, that Miss Van Campen
found. The bear-shaped bottle enraged her particularly. She held it up;
the bear was sitting up on his haunches with his paws up; there was a
cork in his glass head and a few sticky crystals at the bottom. I
laughed.

“It was kümmel,” I said. “The best kümmel comes in those bear-shaped
bottles. It comes from Russia.”

“Those are all brandy bottles, aren’t they?” Miss Van Campen asked.

“I can’t see them all,” I said. “But they probably are.”

“How long has this been going on?”

“I bought them and brought them in myself,” I said. “I have had Italian
officers visit me frequently and I have kept brandy to offer them.”

“You haven’t been drinking it yourself?” she said.

“I have also drunk it myself.”

“Brandy,” she said. “Eleven empty bottles of brandy and that bear
liquid.”

“Kümmel.”

“I will send for some one to take them away. Those are all the empty
bottles you have?”

“For the moment.”

“And I was pitying you having jaundice. Pity is something that is wasted
on you.”

“Thank you.”

“I suppose you can’t be blamed for not wanting to go back to the front.
But I should think you would try something more intelligent than
producing jaundice with alcoholism.”

“With what?”

“With alcoholism. You heard me say it.” I did not say anything. “Unless
you find something else I’m afraid you will have to go back to the front
when you are through with your jaundice. I don’t believe self-inflicted
jaundice entitles you to a convalescent leave.”

“You don’t?”

“I do not.”

“Have you ever had jaundice, Miss Van Campen?”

“No, but I have seen a great deal of it.”

“You noticed how the patients enjoyed it?”

“I suppose it is better than the front.”

“Miss Van Campen,” I said, “did you ever know a man who tried to disable
himself by kicking himself in the scrotum?”

Miss Van Campen ignored the actual question. She had to ignore it or
leave the room. She was not ready to leave because she had disliked me
for a long time and she was now cashing in.

“I have known many men to escape the front through self-inflicted
wounds.”

“That wasn’t the question. I have seen self-inflicted wounds also. I
asked you if you had ever known a man who had tried to disable himself
by kicking himself in the scrotum. Because that is the nearest sensation
to jaundice and it is a sensation that I believe few women have ever
experienced. That was why I asked you if you had ever had the jaundice,
Miss Van Campen, because—” Miss Van Campen left the room. Later Miss
Gage came in.

“What did you say to Van Campen? She was furious.”

“We were comparing sensations. I was going to suggest that she had never
experienced childbirth——”

“You’re a fool,” Gage said. “She’s after your scalp.”

“She has my scalp,” I said. “She’s lost me my leave and she might try
and get me court-martialled. She’s mean enough.”

“She never liked you,” Gage said. “What’s it about?”

“She says I’ve drunk myself into jaundice so as not to go back to the
front.”

“Pooh,” said Gage. “I’ll swear you’ve never taken a drink. Everybody
will swear you’ve never taken a drink.”

“She found the bottles.”

“I’ve told you a hundred times to clear out those bottles. Where are
they now?”

“In the armoire.”

“Have you a suitcase?”

“No. Put them in that rucksack.”

Miss Gage packed the bottles in the rucksack. “I’ll give them to the
porter,” she said. She started for the door.

“Just a minute,” Miss Van Campen said. “I’ll take those bottles.” She
had the porter with her. “Carry them, please,” she said. “I want to show
them to the doctor when I make my report.”

She went down the hall. The porter carried the sack. He knew what was in
it.

Nothing happened except that I lost my leave.




                             CHAPTER XXIII

The night I was to return to the front I sent the porter down to hold a
seat for me on the train when it came from Turin. The train was to leave
at midnight. It was made up at Turin and reached Milan about half-past
ten at night and lay in the station until time to leave. You had to be
there when it came in, to get a seat. The porter took a friend with him,
a machine-gunner on leave who worked in a tailor shop, and was sure that
between them they could hold a place. I gave them money for platform
tickets and had them take my baggage. There was a big rucksack and two
musettes.

I said good-by at the hospital at about five o’clock and went out. The
porter had my baggage in his lodge and I told him I would be at the
station a little before midnight. His wife called me “Signorino” and
cried. She wiped her eyes and shook hands and then cried again. I patted
her on the back and she cried once more. She had done my mending and was
a very short dumpy, happy-faced woman with white hair. When she cried
her whole face went to pieces. I went down to the corner where there was
a wine shop and waited inside looking out the window. It was dark
outside and cold and misty. I paid for my coffee and grappa and I
watched the people going by in the light from the window. I saw
Catherine and knocked on the window. She looked, saw me and smiled, and
I went out to meet her. She was wearing a dark blue cape and a soft felt
hat. We walked along together, along the sidewalk past the wine shops,
then across the market square and up the street and through the archway
to the cathedral square. There were street-car tracks and beyond them
was the cathedral. It was white and wet in the mist. We crossed the tram
tracks. On our left were the shops, their windows lighted, and the
entrance to the galleria. There was a fog in the square and when we came
close to the front of the cathedral it was very big and the stone was
wet.

“Would you like to go in?”

“No,” Catherine said. We walked along. There was a soldier standing with
his girl in the shadow of one of the stone buttresses ahead of us and we
passed them. They were standing tight up against the stone and he had
put his cape around her.

“They’re like us,” I said.

“Nobody is like us,” Catherine said. She did not mean it happily.

“I wish they had some place to go.”

“It mightn’t do them any good.”

“I don’t know. Everybody ought to have some place to go.”

“They have the cathedral,” Catherine said. We were past it now. We
crossed the far end of the square and looked back at the cathedral. It
was fine in the mist. We were standing in front of the leather goods
shop. There were riding boots, a rucksack and ski boots in the window.
Each article was set apart as an exhibit; the rucksack in the centre,
the riding boots on one side and the ski boots on the other. The leather
was dark and oiled smooth as a used saddle. The electric light made high
lights on the dull oiled leather.

“We’ll ski some time.”

“In two months there will be skiing at Mürren,” Catherine said.

“Let’s go there.”

“All right,” she said. We went on past other windows and turned down a
side street.

“I’ve never been this way.”

“This is the way I go to the hospital,” I said. It was a narrow street
and we kept on the right-hand side. There were many people passing in
the fog. There were shops and all the windows were lighted. We looked in
a window at a pile of cheeses. I stopped in front of an armorer’s shop.

“Come in a minute. I have to buy a gun.”

“What sort of gun?”

“A pistol.” We went in and I unbuttoned my belt and laid it with the
empty holster on the counter. Two women were behind the counter. The
women brought out several pistols.

“It must fit this,” I said, opening the holster. It was a gray leather
holster and I had bought it secondhand to wear in the town.

“Have they good pistols?” Catherine asked.

“They’re all about the same. Can I try this one?” I asked the woman.

“I have no place now to shoot,” she said. “But it is very good. You will
not make a mistake with it.”

I snapped it and pulled back the action. The spring was rather strong
but it worked smoothly. I sighted it and snapped it again.

“It is used,” the woman said. “It belonged to an officer who was an
excellent shot.”

“Did you sell it to him?”

“Yes.”

“How did you get it back?”

“From his orderly.”

“Maybe you have mine,” I said. “How much is this?”

“Fifty lire. It is very cheap.”

“All right. I want two extra clips and a box of cartridges.”

She brought them from under the counter.

“Have you any need for a sword?” she asked. “I have some used swords
very cheap.”

“I’m going to the front,” I said.

“Oh yes, then you won’t need a sword,” she said.

I paid for the cartridges and the pistol, filled the magazine and put it
in place, put the pistol in my empty holster, filled the extra clips
with cartridges and put them in the leather slots on the holster and
then buckled on my belt. The pistol felt heavy on the belt. Still, I
thought, it was better to have a regulation pistol. You could always get
shells.

“Now we’re fully armed,” I said. “That was the one thing I had to
remember to do. Some one got my other one going to the hospital.”

“I hope it’s a good pistol,” Catherine said.

“Was there anything else?” the woman asked.

“I don’t believe so.”

“The pistol has a lanyard,” she said.

“So I noticed.” The woman wanted to sell something else.

“You don’t need a whistle?”

“I don’t believe so.”

The woman said good-by and we went out onto the sidewalk. Catherine
looked in the window. The woman looked out and bowed to us.

“What are those little mirrors set in wood for?”

“They’re for attracting birds. They twirl them out in the field and
larks see them and come out and the Italians shoot them.”

“They are an ingenious people,” Catherine said. “You don’t shoot larks
do you, darling, in America?”

“Not especially.”

We crossed the street and started to walk up the other side.

“I feel better now,” Catherine said. “I felt terrible when we started.”

“We always feel good when we’re together.”

“We always will be together.”

“Yes, except that I’m going away at midnight.”

“Don’t think about it, darling.”

We walked on up the street. The fog made the lights yellow.

“Aren’t you tired?” Catherine asked.

“How about you?”

“I’m all right. It’s fun to walk.”

“But let’s not do it too long.”

“No.”

We turned down a side street where there were no lights and walked in
the street. I stopped and kissed Catherine. While I kissed her I felt
her hand on my shoulder. She had pulled my cape around her so it covered
both of us. We were standing in the street against a high wall.

“Let’s go some place,” I said.

“Good,” said Catherine. We walked on along the street until it came out
onto a wider street that was beside a canal. On the other side was a
brick wall and buildings. Ahead, down the street, I saw a street-car
cross a bridge.

“We can get a cab up at the bridge,” I said. We stood on the bridge in
the fog waiting for a carriage. Several street-cars passed, full of
people going home. Then a carriage came along but there was some one in
it. The fog was turning to rain.

“We could walk or take a tram,” Catherine said.

“One will be along,” I said. “They go by here.”

“Here one comes,” she said.

The driver stopped his horse and lowered the metal sign on his meter.
The top of the carriage was up and there were drops of water on the
driver’s coat. His varnished hat was shining in the wet. We sat back in
the seat together and the top of the carriage made it dark.

“Where did you tell him to go?”

“To the station. There’s a hotel across from the station where we can
go.”

“We can go the way we are? Without luggage?”

“Yes,” I said.

It was a long ride to the station up side streets in the rain.

“Won’t we have dinner?” Catherine asked. “I’m afraid I’ll be hungry.”

“We’ll have it in our room.”

“I haven’t anything to wear. I haven’t even a nightgown.”

“We’ll get one,” I said and called to the driver.

“Go to the Via Manzoni and up that.” He nodded and turned off to the
left at the next corner. On the big street Catherine watched for a shop.

“Here’s a place,” she said. I stopped the driver and Catherine got out,
walked across the sidewalk and went inside. I sat back in the carriage
and waited for her. It was raining and I could smell the wet street and
the horse steaming in the rain. She came back with a package and got in
and we drove on.

“I was very extravagant, darling,” she said, “but it’s a fine
nightgown.”

At the hotel I asked Catherine to wait in the carriage while I went in
and spoke to the manager. There were plenty of rooms. Then I went out to
the carriage, paid the driver, and Catherine and I walked in together.
The small boy in buttons carried the package. The manager bowed us
toward the elevator. There was much red plush and brass. The manager
went up in the elevator with us.

“Monsieur and Madame wish dinner in their room?”

“Yes. Will you have the menu brought up?” I said.

“You wish something special for dinner. Some game or a soufflet?”

The elevator passed three floors with a click each time, then clicked
and stopped.

“What have you as game?”

“I could get a pheasant, or a woodcock.”

“A woodcock,” I said. We walked down the corridor. The carpet was worn.
There were many doors. The manager stopped and unlocked a door and
opened it.

“Here you are. A lovely room.”

The small boy in buttons put the package on the table in the centre of
the room. The manager opened the curtains.

“It is foggy outside,” he said. The room was furnished in red plush.
There were many mirrors, two chairs and a large bed with a satin
coverlet. A door led to the bathroom.

“I will send up the menu,” the manager said. He bowed and went out.

I went to the window and looked out, then pulled a cord that shut the
thick plush curtains. Catherine was sitting on the bed, looking at the
cut glass chandelier. She had taken her hat off and her hair shone under
the light. She saw herself in one of the mirrors and put her hands to
her hair. I saw her in three other mirrors. She did not look happy. She
let her cape fall on the bed.

“What’s the matter, darling?”

“I never felt like a whore before,” she said. I went over to the window
and pulled the curtain aside and looked out. I had not thought it would
be like this.

“You’re not a whore.”

“I know it, darling. But it isn’t nice to feel like one.” Her voice was
dry and flat.

“This was the best hotel we could get in,” I said. I looked out the
window. Across the square were the lights of the station. There were
carriages going by on the street and I saw the trees in the park. The
lights from the hotel shone on the wet pavement. Oh, hell, I thought, do
we have to argue now?

“Come over here please,” Catherine said. The flatness was all gone out
of her voice. “Come over, please. I’m a good girl again.” I looked over
at the bed. She was smiling.

I went over and sat on the bed beside her and kissed her.

“You’re my good girl.”

“I’m certainly yours,” she said.

After we had eaten we felt fine, and then after, we felt very happy and
in a little time the room felt like our own home. My room at the
hospital had been our own home and this room was our home too in the
same way.

Catherine wore my tunic over her shoulders while we ate. We were very
hungry and the meal was good and we drank a bottle of Capri and a bottle
of St. Estephe. I drank most of it but Catherine drank some and it made
her feel splendid. For dinner we had a woodcock with soufflé potatoes
and purée de marron, a salad, and zabaione for dessert.

“It’s a fine room,” Catherine said. “It’s a lovely room. We should have
stayed here all the time we’ve been in Milan.”

“It’s a funny room. But it’s nice.”

“Vice is a wonderful thing,” Catherine said. “The people who go in for
it seem to have good taste about it. The red plush is really fine. It’s
just the thing. And the mirrors are very attractive.”

“You’re a lovely girl.”

“I don’t know how a room like this would be for waking up in the
morning. But it’s really a splendid room.” I poured another glass of St.
Estephe.

“I wish we could do something really sinful,” Catherine said.
“Everything we do seems so innocent and simple. I can’t believe we do
anything wrong.”

“You’re a grand girl.”

“I only feel hungry. I get terribly hungry.”

“You’re a fine simple girl,” I said.

“I am a simple girl. No one ever understood it except you.”

“Once when I first met you I spent an afternoon thinking how we would go
to the Hotel Cavour together and how it would be.”

“That was awfully cheeky of you. This isn’t the Cavour is it?”

“No. They wouldn’t have taken us in there.”

“They’ll take us in some time. But that’s how we differ, darling. I
never thought about anything.”

“Didn’t you ever at all?”

“A little,” she said.

“Oh you’re a lovely girl.”

I poured another glass of wine.

“I’m a very simple girl,” Catherine said.

“I didn’t think so at first. I thought you were a crazy girl.”

“I was a little crazy. But I wasn’t crazy in any complicated manner. I
didn’t confuse you did I, darling?”

“Wine is a grand thing,” I said. “It makes you forget all the bad.”

“It’s lovely,” said Catherine. “But it’s given my father gout very
badly.”

“Have you a father?”

“Yes,” said Catherine. “He has gout. You won’t ever have to meet him.
Haven’t you a father?”

“No,” I said. “A step-father.”

“Will I like him?”

“You won’t have to meet him.”

“We have such a fine time,” Catherine said. “I don’t take any interest
in anything else any more. I’m so very happy married to you.”

The waiter came and took away the things. After a while we were very
still and we could hear the rain. Down below on the street a motor car
honked.

               “‘But at my back I always hear
               Time’s wingèd chariot hurrying near,’”

I said.

“I know that poem,” Catherine said. “It’s by Marvell. But it’s about a
girl who wouldn’t live with a man.”

My head felt very clear and cold and I wanted to talk facts.

“Where will you have the baby?”

“I don’t know. The best place I can find.”

“How will you arrange it?”

“The best way I can. Don’t worry, darling. We may have several babies
before the war is over.”

“It’s nearly time to go.”

“I know. You can make it time if you want.”

“No.”

“Then don’t worry, darling. You were fine until now and now you’re
worrying.”

“I won’t. How often will you write?”

“Every day. Do they read your letters?”

“They can’t read English enough to hurt any.”

“I’ll make them very confusing,” Catherine said.

“But not too confusing.”

“I’ll just make them a little confusing.”

“I’m afraid we have to start to go.”

“All right, darling.”

“I hate to leave our fine house.”

“So do I.”

“But we have to go.”

“All right. But we’re never settled in our home very long.”

“We will be.”

“I’ll have a fine home for you when you come back.”

“Maybe I’ll be back right away.”

“Perhaps you’ll be hurt just a little in the foot.”

“Or the lobe of the ear.”

“No I want your ears the way they are.”

“And not my feet?”

“Your feet have been hit already.”

“We have to go, darling. Really.”

“All right. You go first.”




                              CHAPTER XXIV

We walked down the stairs instead of taking the elevator. The carpet on
the stairs was worn. I had paid for the dinner when it came up and the
waiter, who had brought it, was sitting on a chair near the door. He
jumped up and bowed and I went with him into the side room and paid the
bill for the room. The manager had remembered me as a friend and refused
payment in advance but when he retired he had remembered to have the
waiter stationed at the door so that I should not get out without
paying. I suppose that had happened; even with his friends. One had so
many friends in a war.

I asked the waiter to get us a carriage and he took Catherine’s package
that I was carrying and went out with an umbrella. Outside through the
window we saw him crossing the street in the rain. We stood in the side
room and looked out the window.

“How do you feel, Cat?”

“Sleepy.”

“I feel hollow and hungry.”

“Have you anything to eat?”

“Yes, in my musette.”

I saw the carriage coming. It stopped, the horse’s head hanging in the
rain, and the waiter stepped out, opened his umbrella, and came toward
the hotel. We met him at the door and walked out under the umbrella down
the wet walk to the carriage at the curb. Water was running in the
gutter.

“There is your package on the seat,” the waiter said. He stood with the
umbrella until we were in and I had tipped him.

“Many thanks. Pleasant journey,” he said. The coachman lifted the reins
and the horse started. The waiter turned away under the umbrella and
went toward the hotel. We drove down the street and turned to the left,
then came around to the right in front of the station. There were two
carabinieri standing under the light just out of the rain. The light
shone on their hats. The rain was clear and transparent against the
light from the station. A porter came out from under the shelter of the
station, his shoulders up against the rain.

“No,” I said. “Thanks. I don’t need thee.”

He went back under the shelter of the archway. I turned to Catherine.
Her face was in the shadow from the hood of the carriage.

“We might as well say good-by.”

“I can’t go in?”

“No.”

“Good-by, Cat.”

“Will you tell him the hospital?”

“Yes.”

I told the driver the address to drive to. He nodded.

“Good-by,” I said. “Take good care of yourself and young Catherine.”

“Good-by, darling.”

“Good-by,” I said. I stepped out into the rain and the carriage started.
Catherine leaned out and I saw her face in the light. She smiled and
waved. The carriage went up the street, Catherine pointed in toward the
archway. I looked, there were only the two carabinieri and the archway.
I realized she meant for me to get in out of the rain. I went in and
stood and watched the carriage turn the corner. Then I started through
the station and down the runway to the train.

The porter was on the platform looking for me. I followed him into the
train, crowding past people and along the aisle and in through a door to
where the machine-gunner sat in the corner of a full compartment. My
rucksack and musettes were above his head on the luggage rack. There
were many men standing in the corridor and the men in the compartment
all looked at us when we came in. There were not enough places in the
train and every one was hostile. The machine-gunner stood up for me to
sit down. Some one tapped me on the shoulder. I looked around. It was a
very tall gaunt captain of artillery with a red scar along his jaw. He
had looked through the glass on the corridor and then come in.

“What do you say?” I asked. I had turned and faced him. He was taller
than I and his face was very thin under the shadow of his cap-visor and
the scar was new and shiny. Every one in the compartment was looking at
me.

“You can’t do that,” he said. “You can’t have a soldier save you a
place.”

“I have done it.”

He swallowed and I saw his Adam’s apple go up and then down. The
machine-gunner stood in front of the place. Other men looked in through
the glass. No one in the compartment said anything.

“You have no right to do that. I was here two hours before you came.”

“What do you want?”

“The seat.”

“So do I.”

I watched his face and could feel the whole compartment against me. I
did not blame them. He was in the right. But I wanted the seat. Still no
one said anything.

Oh, hell, I thought.

“Sit down, Signor Capitano,” I said. The machine-gunner moved out of the
way and the tall captain sat down. He looked at me. His face seemed
hurt. But he had the seat. “Get my things,” I said to the
machine-gunner. We went out in the corridor. The train was full and I
knew there was no chance of a place. I gave the porter and the
machine-gunner ten lire apiece. They went down the corridor and outside
on the platform looking in the windows but there were no places.

“Maybe some will get off at Brescia,” the porter said.

“More will get on at Brescia,” said the machine-gunner. I said good-by
to them and we shook hands and they left. They both felt badly. Inside
the train we were all standing in the corridor when the train started. I
watched the lights of the station and the yards as we went out. It was
still raining and soon the windows were wet and you could not see out.
Later I slept on the floor of the corridor; first putting my pocket-book
with my money and papers in it inside my shirt and trousers so that it
was inside the leg of my breeches. I slept all night, waking at Brescia
and Verona when more men got on the train, but going back to sleep at
once. I had my head on one of the musettes and my arms around the other
and I could feel the pack and they could all walk over me if they
wouldn’t step on me. Men were sleeping on the floor all down the
corridor. Others stood holding on to the window rods or leaning against
the doors. That train was always crowded.




                                BOOK III




                              CHAPTER XXV

Now in the fall the trees were all bare and the roads were muddy. I rode
to Gorizia from Udine on a camion. We passed other camions on the road
and I looked at the country. The mulberry trees were bare and the fields
were brown. There were wet dead leaves on the road from the rows of bare
trees and men were working on the road, tamping stone in the ruts from
piles of crushed stone along the side of the road between the trees. We
saw the town with a mist over it that cut off the mountains. We crossed
the river and I saw that it was running high. It had been raining in the
mountains. We came into the town past the factories and then the houses
and villas and I saw that many more houses had been hit. On a narrow
street we passed a British Red Cross ambulance. The driver wore a cap
and his face was thin and very tanned. I did not know him. I got down
from the camion in the big square in front of the Town Major’s house,
the driver handed down my rucksack and I put it on and swung on the two
musettes and walked to our villa. It did not feel like a homecoming.

I walked down the damp gravel driveway looking at the villa through the
trees. The windows were all shut but the door was open. I went in and
found the major sitting at a table in the bare room with maps and typed
sheets of paper on the wall.

“Hello,” he said. “How are you?” He looked older and drier.

“I’m good,” I said. “How is everything?”

“It’s all over,” he said. “Take off your kit and sit down.” I put my
pack and the two musettes on the floor and my cap on the pack. I brought
the other chair over from the wall and sat down by the desk.

“It’s been a bad summer,” the major said. “Are you strong now?”

“Yes.”

“Did you ever get the decorations?”

“Yes. I got them fine. Thank you very much.”

“Let’s see them.”

I opened my cape so he could see the two ribbons.

“Did you get the boxes with the medals?”

“No. Just the papers.”

“The boxes will come later. That takes more time.”

“What do you want me to do?”

“The cars are all away. There are six up north at Caporetto. You know
Caporetto?”

“Yes,” I said. I remembered it as a little white town with a campanile
in a valley. It was a clean little town and there was a fine fountain in
the square.

“They are working from there. There are many sick now. The fighting is
over.”

“Where are the others?”

“There are two up in the mountains and four still on the Bainsizza. The
other two ambulance sections are in the Carso with the third army.”

“What do you wish me to do?”

“You can go and take over the four cars on the Bainsizza if you like.
Gino has been up there a long time. You haven’t seen it up there, have
you?”

“No.”

“It was very bad. We lost three cars.”

“I heard about it.”

“Yes, Rinaldi wrote you.”

“Where is Rinaldi?”

“He is here at the hospital. He has had a summer and fall of it.”

“I believe it.”

“It has been bad,” the major said. “You couldn’t believe how bad it’s
been. I’ve often thought you were lucky to be hit when you were.”

“I know I was.”

“Next year will be worse,” the major said. “Perhaps they will attack
now. They say they are to attack but I can’t believe it. It is too late.
You saw the river?”

“Yes. It’s high already.”

“I don’t believe they will attack now that the rains have started. We
will have the snow soon. What about your countrymen? Will there be other
Americans besides yourself?”

“They are training an army of ten million.”

“I hope we get some of them. But the French will hog them all. We’ll
never get any down here. All right. You stay here to-night and go out
to-morrow with the little car and send Gino back. I’ll send somebody
with you that knows the road. Gino will tell you everything. They are
shelling quite a little still but it is all over. You will want to see
the Bainsizza.”

“I’m glad to see it. I am glad to be back with you again, Signor
Maggiore.”

He smiled. “You are very good to say so. I am very tired of this war. If
I was away I do not believe I would come back.”

“Is it so bad?”

“Yes. It is so bad and worse. Go get cleaned up and find your friend
Rinaldi.”

I went out and carried my bags up the stairs. Rinaldi was not in the
room but his things were there and I sat down on the bed and unwrapped
my puttees and took the shoe off my right foot. Then I lay back on the
bed. I was tired and my right foot hurt. It seemed silly to lie on the
bed with one shoe off, so I sat up and unlaced the other shoe and
dropped it on the floor, then lay back on the blanket again. The room
was stuffy with the window closed but I was too tired to get up and open
it. I saw my things were all in one corner of the room. Outside it was
getting dark. I lay on the bed and thought about Catherine and waited
for Rinaldi. I was going to try not to think about Catherine except at
night before I went to sleep. But now I was tired and there was nothing
to do, so I lay and thought about her. I was thinking about her when
Rinaldi came in. He looked just the same. Perhaps he was a little
thinner.

“Well, baby,” he said. I sat up on the bed. He came over, sat down and
put his arm around me. “Good old baby.” He whacked me on the back and I
held both his arms.

“Old baby,” he said. “Let me see your knee.”

“I’ll have to take off my pants.”

“Take off your pants, baby. We’re all friends here. I want to see what
kind of a job they did.” I stood up, took off the breeches and pulled
off the knee-brace. Rinaldi sat on the floor and bent the knee gently
back and forth. He ran his finger along the scar; put his thumbs
together over the kneecap and rocked the knee gently with his fingers.

“Is that all the articulation you have?”

“Yes.”

“It’s a crime to send you back. They ought to get complete
articulation.”

“It’s a lot better than it was. It was stiff as a board.”

Rinaldi bent it more. I watched his hands. He had fine surgeon’s hands.
I looked at the top of his head, his hair shiny and parted smoothly. He
bent the knee too far.

“Ouch!” I said.

“You ought to have more treatment on it with the machines,” Rinaldi
said.

“It’s better than it was.”

“I see that, baby. This is something I know more about than you.” He
stood up and sat down on the bed. “The knee itself is a good job.” He
was through with the knee. “Tell me all about everything.”

“There’s nothing to tell,” I said. “I’ve led a quiet life.”

“You act like a married man,” he said. “What’s the matter with you?”

“Nothing,” I said. “What’s the matter with you?”

“This war is killing me,” Rinaldi said, “I am very depressed by it.” He
folded his hands over his knee.

“Oh,” I said.

“What’s the matter? Can’t I even have human impulses?”

“No. I can see you’ve been having a fine time. Tell me.”

“All summer and all fall I’ve operated. I work all the time. I do
everybody’s work. All the hard ones they leave to me. By God, baby, I am
becoming a lovely surgeon.”

“That sounds better.”

“I never think. No, by God, I don’t think; I operate.”

“That’s right.”

“But now, baby, it’s all over. I don’t operate now and I feel like hell.
This is a terrible war, baby. You believe me when I say it. Now you
cheer me up. Did you bring the phonograph records?”

“Yes.”

They were wrapped in paper in a cardboard box in my rucksack. I was too
tired to get them out.

“Don’t you feel good yourself, baby?”

“I feel like hell.”

“This war is terrible,” Rinaldi said. “Come on. We’ll both get drunk and
be cheerful. Then we’ll go get the ashes dragged. Then we’ll feel fine.”

“I’ve had the jaundice,” I said, “and I can’t get drunk.”

“Oh, baby, how you’ve come back to me. You come back serious and with a
liver. I tell you this war is a bad thing. Why did we make it anyway?”

“We’ll have a drink. I don’t want to get drunk but we’ll have a drink.”

Rinaldi went across the room to the washstand and brought back two
glasses and a bottle of cognac.

“It’s Austrian cognac,” he said. “Seven stars. It’s all they captured on
San Gabriele.”

“Were you up there?”

“No. I haven’t been anywhere. I’ve been here all the time operating.
Look, baby, this is your old toothbrushing glass. I kept it all the time
to remind me of you.”

“To remind you to brush your teeth.”

“No. I have my own too. I kept this to remind me of you trying to brush
away the Villa Rossa from your teeth in the morning, swearing and eating
aspirin and cursing harlots. Every time I see that glass I think of you
trying to clean your conscience with a toothbrush.” He came over to the
bed. “Kiss me once and tell me you’re not serious.”

“I never kiss you. You’re an ape.”

“I know, you are the fine good Anglo-Saxon boy. I know. You are the
remorse boy, I know. I will wait till I see the Anglo-Saxon brushing
away harlotry with a toothbrush.”

“Put some cognac in the glass.”

We touched glasses and drank. Rinaldi laughed at me.

“I will get you drunk and take out your liver and put you in a good
Italian liver and make you a man again.”

I held the glass for some more cognac. It was dark outside now. Holding
the glass of cognac, I went over and opened the window. The rain had
stopped falling. It was colder outside and there was a mist in the
trees.

“Don’t throw the cognac out the window,” Rinaldi said. “If you can’t
drink it give it to me.”

“Go something yourself,” I said. I was glad to see Rinaldi again. He had
spent two years teasing me and I had always liked it. We understood each
other very well.

“Are you married?” he asked from the bed. I was standing against the
wall by the window.

“Not yet.”

“Are you in love?”

“Yes.”

“With that English girl?”

“Yes.”

“Poor baby. Is she good to you?”

“Of course.”

“I mean is she good to you practically speaking?”

“Shut up.”

“I will. You will see I am a man of extreme delicacy. Does she——?”

“Rinin,” I said. “Please shut up. If you want to be my friend, shut up.”

“I don’t _want_ to be your friend, baby. I _am_ your friend.”

“Then shut up.”

“All right.”

I went over to the bed and sat down beside Rinaldi. He was holding his
glass and looking at the floor.

“You see how it is, Rinin?”

“Oh, yes. All my life I encounter sacred subjects. But very few with
you. I suppose you must have them too.” He looked at the floor.

“You haven’t any?”

“No.”

“Not any?”

“No.”

“I can say this about your mother and that about your sister?”

“And that about _your sister_,” Rinaldi said swiftly. We both laughed.

“The old superman,” I said.

“I am jealous maybe,” Rinaldi said.

“No, you’re not.”

“I don’t mean like that. I mean something else. Have you any married
friends?”

“Yes,” I said.

“I haven’t,” Rinaldi said. “Not if they love each other.”

“Why not?”

“They don’t like me.”

“Why not?”

“I am the snake. I am the snake of reason.”

“You’re getting it mixed. The apple was reason.”

“No, it was the snake.” He was more cheerful.

“You are better when you don’t think so deeply,” I said.

“I love you, baby,” he said. “You puncture me when I become a great
Italian thinker. But I know many things I can’t say. I know more than
you.”

“Yes. You do.”

“But you will have a better time. Even with remorse you will have a
better time.”

“I don’t think so.”

“Oh, yes. That is true. Already I am only happy when I am working.” He
looked at the floor again.

“You’ll get over that.”

“No. I only like two other things; one is bad for my work and the other
is over in half an hour or fifteen minutes. Sometimes less.”

“Sometimes a good deal less.”

“Perhaps I have improved, baby. You do not know. But there are only the
two things and my work.”

“You’ll get other things.”

“No. We never get anything. We are born with all we have and we never
learn. We never get anything new. We all start complete. You should be
glad not to be a Latin.”

“There’s no such thing as a Latin. That is ‘Latin’ thinking. You are so
proud of your defects.” Rinaldi looked up and laughed.

“We’ll stop, baby. I am tired from thinking so much.” He had looked
tired when he came in. “It’s nearly time to eat. I’m glad you’re back.
You are my best friend and my war brother.”

“When do the war brothers eat?” I asked.

“Right away. We’ll drink once more for your liver’s sake.”

“Like Saint Paul.”

“You are inaccurate. That was wine and the stomach. Take a little wine
for your stomach’s sake.”

“Whatever you have in the bottle,” I said. “For any sake you mention.”

“To your girl,” Rinaldi said. He held out his glass.

“All right.”

“I’ll never say a dirty thing about her.”

“Don’t strain yourself.”

He drank off the cognac. “I am pure,” he said. “I am like you, baby. I
will get an English girl too. As a matter of fact I knew your girl first
but she was a little tall for me. A tall girl for a sister,” he quoted.

“You have a lovely pure mind,” I said.

“Haven’t I? That’s why they call me Rinaldo Purissimo.”

“Rinaldo Sporchissimo.”

“Come on, baby, we’ll go down to eat while my mind is still pure.”

I washed, combed my hair and we went down the stairs. Rinaldi was a
little drunk. In the room where we ate, the meal was not quite ready.

“I’ll go get the bottle,” Rinaldi said. He went off up the stairs. I sat
at the table and he came back with the bottle and poured us each a half
tumbler of cognac.

“Too much,” I said and held up the glass and sighted at the lamp on the
table.

“Not for an empty stomach. It is a wonderful thing. It burns out the
stomach completely. Nothing is worse for you.”

“All right.”

“Self-destruction day by day,” Rinaldi said. “It ruins the stomach and
makes the hand shake. Just the thing for a surgeon.”

“You recommend it?”

“Heartily. I use no other. Drink it down, baby, and look forward to
being sick.”

I drank half the glass. In the hall I could hear the orderly calling.
“Soup! Soup is ready!”

The major came in, nodded to us and sat down. He seemed very small at
table.

“Is this all we are?” he asked. The orderly put the soup bowl down and
he ladled out a plate full.

“We are all,” Rinaldi said. “Unless the priest comes. If he knew
Federico was here he would be here.”

“Where is he?” I asked.

“He’s at 307,” the major said. He was busy with his soup. He wiped his
mouth, wiping his upturned gray mustache carefully. “He will come I
think. I called them and left word to tell him you were here.”

“I miss the noise of the mess,” I said.

“Yes, it’s quiet,” the major said.

“I will be noisy,” said Rinaldi.

“Drink some wine, Enrico,” said the major. He filled my glass. The
spaghetti came in and we were all busy. We were finishing the spaghetti
when the priest came in. He was the same as ever, small and brown and
compact looking. I stood up and we shook hands. He put his hand on my
shoulder.

“I came as soon as I heard,” he said.

“Sit down,” the major said. “You’re late.”

“Good-evening, priest,” Rinaldi said, using the English word. They had
taken that up from the priest-baiting captain, who spoke a little
English. “Good-evening, Rinaldo,” the priest said. The orderly brought
him soup but he said he would start with the spaghetti.

“How are you?” he asked me.

“Fine,” I said. “How have things been?”

“Drink some wine, priest,” Rinaldi said. “Take a little wine for your
stomach’s sake. That’s Saint Paul, you know.”

“Yes I know,” said the priest politely. Rinaldi filled his glass.

“That Saint Paul,” said Rinaldi. “He’s the one who makes all the
trouble.” The priest looked at me and smiled. I could see that the
baiting did not touch him now.

“That Saint Paul,” Rinaldi said. “He was a rounder and a chaser and then
when he was no longer hot he said it was no good. When he was finished
he made the rules for us who are still hot. Isn’t it true, Federico?”

The major smiled. We were eating meat stew now.

“I never discuss a Saint after dark,” I said. The priest looked up from
the stew and smiled at me.

“There he is, gone over with the priest,” Rinaldi said. “Where are all
the good old priest-baiters? Where is Cavalcanti? Where is Brundi? Where
is Cesare? Do I have to bait this priest alone without support?”

“He is a good priest,” said the major.

“He is a good priest,” said Rinaldi. “But still a priest. I try to make
the mess like the old days. I want to make Federico happy. To hell with
you, priest!”

I saw the major look at him and notice that he was drunk. His thin face
was white. The line of his hair was very black against the white of his
forehead.

“It’s all right, Rinaldo,” said the priest. “It’s all right.”

“To hell with you,” said Rinaldi. “To hell with the whole damn
business.” He sat back in his chair.

“He’s been under a strain and he’s tired,” the major said to me. He
finished his meat and wiped up the gravy with a piece of bread.

“I don’t give a damn,” Rinaldi said to the table. “To hell with the
whole business.” He looked defiantly around the table, his eyes flat,
his face pale.

“All right,” I said. “To hell with the whole damn business.”

“No, no,” said Rinaldi. “You can’t do it. You can’t do it. I say you
can’t do it. You’re dry and you’re empty and there’s nothing else.
There’s nothing else I tell you. Not a damned thing. I know, when I stop
working.”

The priest shook his head. The orderly took away the stew dish.

“What are you eating meat for?” Rinaldi turned to the priest. “Don’ you
know it’s Friday?”

“It’s Thursday,” the priest said.

“It’s a lie. It’s Friday. You’re eating the body of our Lord. It’s
God-meat. I know. It’s dead Austrian. That’s what you’re eating.”

“The white meat is from officers,” I said, completing the old joke.

Rinaldi laughed. He filled his glass.

“Don’t mind me,” he said. “I’m just a little crazy.”

“You ought to have a leave,” the priest said.

The major shook his head at him. Rinaldi looked at the priest.

“You think I ought to have a leave?”

The major shook his head at the priest. Rinaldi was looking at the
priest.

“Just as you like,” the priest said. “Not if you don’t want.”

“To hell with you,” Rinaldi said. “They try to get rid of me. Every
night they try to get rid of me. I fight them off. What if I have it.
Everybody has it. The whole world’s got it. First,” he went on, assuming
the manner of a lecturer, “it’s a little pimple. Then we notice a rash
between the shoulders. Then we notice nothing at all. We put our faith
in mercury.”

“Or salvarsan,” the major interrupted quietly.

“A mercurial product,” Rinaldi said. He acted very elated now. “I know
something worth two of that. Good old priest,” he said. “You’ll never
get it. Baby will get it. It’s an industrial accident. It’s a simple
industrial accident.”

The orderly brought in the sweet and coffee. The dessert was a sort of
black bread pudding with hard sauce. The lamp was smoking; the black
smoke going close up inside the chimney.

“Bring two candles and take away the lamp,” the major said. The orderly
brought two lighted candles each in a saucer, and took out the lamp
blowing it out. Rinaldi was quiet now. He seemed all right. We talked
and after the coffee we all went out into the hall.

“You want to talk to the priest. I have to go in the town,” Rinaldi
said. “Good-night, priest.”

“Good-night, Rinaldo,” the priest said.

“I’ll see you Fredi,” Rinaldi said.

“Yes,” I said. “Come in early.” He made a face and went out the door.
The major was standing with us. “He’s very tired and overworked,” he
said. “He thinks too he has syphilis. I don’t believe it but he may
have. He is treating himself for it. Good-night. You will leave before
daylight, Enrico?”

“Yes.”

“Good-by then,” he said. “Good luck. Peduzzi will wake you and go with
you.”

“Good-by, Signor Maggiore.”

“Good-by. They talk about an Austrian offensive but I don’t believe it.
I hope not. But anyway it won’t be here. Gino will tell you everything.
The telephone works well now.”

“I’ll call regularly.”

“Please do. Good-night. Don’t let Rinaldi drink so much brandy.”

“I’ll try not to.”

“Good-night, priest.”

“Good-night, Signor Maggiore.”

He went off into his office.




                              CHAPTER XXVI

I went to the door and looked out. It had stopped raining but there was
a mist.

“Should we go upstairs?” I asked the priest.

“I can only stay a little while.”

“Come on up.”

We climbed the stairs and went into my room. I lay down on Rinaldi’s
bed. The priest sat on my cot that the orderly had set up. It was dark
in the room.

“Well,” he said, “how are you really?”

“I’m all right. I’m tired to-night.”

“I’m tired too, but from no cause.”

“What about the war?”

“I think it will be over soon. I don’t know why, but I feel it.”

“How do you feel it?”

“You know how your major is? Gentle? Many people are like that now.”

“I feel that way myself,” I said.

“It has been a terrible summer,” said the priest. He was surer of
himself now than when I had gone away. “You cannot believe how it has
been. Except that you have been there and you know how it can be. Many
people have realized the war this summer. Officers whom I thought could
never realize it realize it now.”

“What will happen?” I stroked the blanket with my hand.

“I do not know but I do not think it can go on much longer.”

“What will happen?”

“They will stop fighting.”

“Who?”

“Both sides.”

“I hope so,” I said.

“You don’t believe it?”

“I don’t believe both sides will stop fighting at once.”

“I suppose not. It is too much to expect. But when I see the changes in
men I do not think it can go on.”

“Who won the fighting this summer?”

“No one.”

“The Austrians won,” I said. “They kept them from taking San Gabriele.
They’ve won. They won’t stop fighting.”

“If they feel as we feel they may stop. They have gone through the same
thing.”

“No one ever stopped when they were winning.”

“You discourage me.”

“I can only say what I think.”

“Then you think it will go on and on? Nothing will ever happen?”

“I don’t know. I only think the Austrians will not stop when they have
won a victory. It is in defeat that we become Christian.”

“The Austrians are Christians—except for the Bosnians.”

“I don’t mean technically Christian. I mean like Our Lord.”

He said nothing.

“We are all gentler now because we are beaten. How would Our Lord have
been if Peter had rescued him in the Garden?”

“He would have been just the same.”

“I don’t think so,” I said.

“You discourage me,” he said. “I believe and I pray that something will
happen. I have felt it very close.”

“Something may happen,” I said. “But it will happen only to us. If they
felt the way we do, it would be all right. But they have beaten us. They
feel another way.”

“Many of the soldiers have always felt this way. It is not because they
were beaten.”

“They were beaten to start with. They were beaten when they took them
from their farms and put them in the army. That is why the peasant has
wisdom, because he is defeated from the start. Put him in power and see
how wise he is.”

He did not say anything. He was thinking.

“Now I am depressed myself,” I said. “That’s why I never think about
these things. I never think and yet when I begin to talk I say the
things I have found out in my mind without thinking.”

“I had hoped for something.”

“Defeat?”

“No. Something more.”

“There isn’t anything more. Except victory. It may be worse.”

“I hoped for a long time for victory.”

“Me too.”

“Now I don’t know.”

“It has to be one or the other.”

“I don’t believe in victory any more.”

“I don’t. But I don’t believe in defeat. Though it may be better.”

“What do you believe in?”

“In sleep,” I said. He stood up.

“I am very sorry to have stayed so long. But I like so to talk with
you.”

“It is very nice to talk again. I said that about sleeping, meaning
nothing.”

We stood up and shook hands in the dark.

“I sleep at 307 now,” he said.

“I go out on post early to-morrow.”

“I’ll see you when you come back.”

“We’ll have a walk and talk together.” I walked with him to the door.

“Don’t go down,” he said. “It is very nice that you are back. Though not
so nice for you.” He put his hand on my shoulder.

“It’s all right for me,” I said. “Good-night.”

“Good-night. Ciaou!”

“Ciaou!” I said. I was deadly sleepy.




                             CHAPTER XXVII

I woke when Rinaldi came in but he did not talk and I went back to sleep
again. In the morning I was dressed and gone before it was light.
Rinaldi did not wake when I left.

I had not seen the Bainsizza before and it was strange to go up the
slope where the Austrians had been, beyond the place on the river where
I had been wounded. There was a steep new road and many trucks. Beyond,
the road flattened out and I saw woods and steep hills in the mist.
There were woods that had been taken quickly and not smashed. Then
beyond where the road was not protected by the hills it was screened by
matting on the sides and over the top. The road ended in a wrecked
village. The lines were up beyond. There was much artillery around. The
houses were badly smashed but things were very well organized and there
were signboards everywhere. We found Gino and he got us some coffee and
later I went with him and met various people and saw the posts. Gino
said the British cars were working further down the Bainsizza at Ravne.
He had great admiration for the British. There was still a certain
amount of shelling, he said, but not many wounded. There would be many
sick now the rains had started. The Austrians were supposed to attack
but he did not believe it. We were supposed to attack too, but they had
not brought up any new troops so he thought that was off too. Food was
scarce and he would be glad to get a full meal in Gorizia. What kind of
supper had I had? I told him and he said that would be wonderful. He was
especially impressed by the _dolce_. I did not describe it in detail,
only said it was a _dolce_, and I think he believed it was something
more elaborate than bread pudding.

Did I know where he was going to go? I said I didn’t but that some of
the other cars were at Caporetto. He hoped he would go up that way. It
was a nice little place and he liked the high mountain hauling up
beyond. He was a nice boy and every one seemed to like him. He said
where it really had been hell was at San Gabriele and the attack beyond
Lom that had gone bad. He said the Austrians had a great amount of
artillery in the woods along Ternova ridge beyond and above us, and
shelled the roads badly at night. There was a battery of naval guns that
had gotten on his nerves. I would recognize them because of their flat
trajectory. You heard the report and then the shriek commenced almost
instantly. They usually fired two guns at once, one right after the
other, and the fragments from the burst were enormous. He showed me one,
a smoothly jagged piece of metal over a foot long. It looked like
babbiting metal.

“I don’t suppose they are so effective,” Gino said. “But they scare me.
They all sound as though they came directly for you. There is the boom,
then instantly the shriek and burst. What’s the use of not being wounded
if they scare you to death?”

He said there were Croats in the lines opposite us now and some Magyars.
Our troops were still in the attacking positions. There was no wire to
speak of and no place to fall back to if there should be an Austrian
attack. There were fine positions for defense along the low mountains
that came up out of the plateau but nothing had been done about
organizing them for defense. What did I think about the Bainsizza
anyway?

I had expected it to be flatter, more like a plateau. I had not realized
it was so broken up.

“Alto piano,” Gino said, “but no piano.”

We went back to the cellar of the house where he lived. I said I thought
a ridge that flattened out on top and had a little depth would be easier
and more practical to hold than a succession of small mountains. It was
no harder to attack up a mountain than on the level, I argued. “That
depends on the mountains,” he said. “Look at San Gabriele.”

“Yes,” I said, “but where they had trouble was at the top where it was
flat. They got up to the top easy enough.”

“Not so easy,” he said.

“Yes,” I said, “but that was a special case because it was a fortress
rather than a mountain, anyway. The Austrians had been fortifying it for
years.” I meant tactically speaking in a war where there was some
movement a succession of mountains were nothing to hold as a line
because it was too easy to turn them. You should have possible mobility
and a mountain is not very mobile. Also, people always over-shoot down
hill. If the flank were turned, the best men would be left on the
highest mountains. I did not believe in a war in mountains. I had
thought about it a lot, I said. You pinched off one mountain and they
pinched off another but when something really started every one had to
get down off the mountains.

What were you going to do if you had a mountain frontier? he asked.

I had not worked that out yet, I said, and we both laughed. “But,” I
said, “in the old days the Austrians were always whipped in the
quadrilateral around Verona. They let them come down onto the plain and
whipped them there.”

“Yes,” said Gino. “But those were Frenchmen and you can work out
military problems clearly when you are fighting in somebody else’s
country.”

“Yes,” I agreed, “when it is your own country you cannot use it so
scientifically.”

“The Russians did, to trap Napoleon.”

“Yes, but they had plenty of country. If you tried to retreat to trap
Napoleon in Italy you would find yourself in Brindisi.”

“A terrible place,” said Gino. “Have you ever been there?”

“Not to stay.”

“I am a patriot,” Gino said. “But I cannot love Brindisi or Taranto.”

“Do you love the Bainsizza?” I asked.

“The soil is sacred,” he said. “But I wish it grew more potatoes. You
know when we came here we found fields of potatoes the Austrians had
planted.”

“Has the food really been short?”

“I myself have never had enough to eat but I am a big eater and I have
not starved. The mess is average. The regiments in the line get pretty
good food but those in support don’t get so much. Something is wrong
somewhere. There should be plenty of food.”

“The dogfish are selling it somewhere else.”

“Yes, they give the battalions in the front line as much as they can but
the ones in back are very short. They have eaten all the Austrians’
potatoes and chestnuts from the woods. They ought to feed them better.
We are big eaters. I am sure there is plenty of food. It is very bad for
the soldiers to be short of food. Have you ever noticed the difference
it makes in the way you think?”

“Yes,” I said. “It can’t win a war but it can lose one.”

“We won’t talk about losing. There is enough talk about losing. What has
been done this summer cannot have been done in vain.”

I did not say anything. I was always embarrassed by the words sacred,
glorious, and sacrifice and the expression in vain. We had heard them,
sometimes standing in the rain almost out of earshot, so that only the
shouted words came through, and had read them, on proclamations that
were slapped up by billposters over other proclamations, now for a long
time, and I had seen nothing sacred, and the things that were glorious
had no glory and the sacrifices were like the stockyards at Chicago if
nothing was done with the meat except to bury it. There were many words
that you could not stand to hear and finally only the names of places
had dignity. Certain numbers were the same way and certain dates and
these with the names of the places were all you could say and have them
mean anything. Abstract words such as glory, honor, courage, or hallow
were obscene beside the concrete names of villages, the numbers of
roads, the names of rivers, the numbers of regiments and the dates. Gino
was a patriot, so he said things that separated us sometimes, but he was
also a fine boy and I understood his being a patriot. He was born one.
He left with Peduzzi in the car to go back to Gorizia.

It stormed all that day. The wind drove down the rain and everywhere
there was standing water and mud. The plaster of the broken houses was
gray and wet. Late in the afternoon the rain stopped and from out number
two post I saw the bare wet autumn country with clouds over the tops of
the hills and the straw screening over the roads wet and dripping. The
sun came out once before it went down and shone on the bare woods beyond
the ridge. There were many Austrian guns in the woods on that ridge but
only a few fired. I watched the sudden round puffs of shrapnel smoke in
the sky above a broken farmhouse near where the line was; soft puffs
with a yellow white flash in the centre. You saw the flash, then heard
the crack, then saw the smoke ball distort and thin in the wind. There
were many iron shrapnel balls in the rubble of the houses and on the
road beside the broken house where the post was, but they did not shell
near the post that afternoon. We loaded two cars and drove down the road
that was screened with wet mats and the last of the sun came through in
the breaks between the strips of mattings. Before we were out on the
clear road behind the hill the sun was down. We went on down the clear
road and as it turned a corner into the open and went into the square
arched tunnel of matting the rain started again.

The wind rose in the night and at three o’clock in the morning with the
rain coming in sheets there was a bombardment and the Croatians came
over across the mountain meadows and through patches of woods and into
the front line. They fought in the dark in the rain and a counter-attack
of scared men from the second line drove them back. There was much
shelling and many rockets in the rain and machine-gun and rifle fire all
along the line. They did not come again and it was quieter and between
the gusts of wind and rain we could hear the sound of a great
bombardment far to the north.

The wounded were coming into the post, some were carried on stretchers,
some walking and some were brought on the backs of men that came across
the field. They were wet to the skin and all were scared. We filled two
cars with stretcher cases as they came up from the cellar of the post
and as I shut the door of the second car and fastened it I felt the rain
on my face turn to snow. The flakes were coming heavy and fast in the
rain.

When daylight came the storm was still blowing but the snow had stopped.
It had melted as it fell on the wet ground and now it was raining again.
There was another attack just after daylight but it was unsuccessful. We
expected an attack all day but it did not come until the sun was going
down. The bombardment started to the south below the long wooded ridge
where the Austrian guns were concentrated. We expected a bombardment but
it did not come. It was getting dark. Guns were firing from the field
behind the village and the shells, going away, had a comfortable sound.

We heard that the attack to the south had been unsuccessful. They did
not attack that night but we heard that they had broken through to the
north. In the night word came that we were to prepare to retreat. The
captain at the post told me this. He had it from the Brigade. A little
while later he came from the telephone and said it was a lie. The
Brigade had received orders that the line of the Bainsizza should be
held no matter what happened. I asked about the break through and he
said that he had heard at the Brigade that the Austrians had broken
through the twenty-seventh army corps up toward Caporetto. There had
been a great battle in the north all day.

“If those bastards let them through we are cooked,” he said.

“It’s Germans that are attacking,” one of the medical officers said. The
word Germans was something to be frightened of. We did not want to have
anything to do with the Germans.

“There are fifteen divisions of Germans,” the medical officer said.
“They have broken through and we will be cut off.”

“At the Brigade, they say this line is to be held. They say they have
not broken through badly and that we will hold a line across the
mountains from Monte Maggiore.”

“Where do they hear this?”

“From the Division.”

“The word that we were to retreat came from the Division.”

“We work under the Army Corps,” I said. “But here I work under you.
Naturally when you tell me to go I will go. But get the orders
straight.”

“The orders are that we stay here. You clear the wounded from here to
the clearing station.”

“Sometimes we clear from the clearing station to the field hospitals
too,” I said. “Tell me, I have never seen a retreat—if there is a
retreat how are all the wounded evacuated?”

“They are not. They take as many as they can and leave the rest.”

“What will I take in the cars?”

“Hospital equipment.”

“All right,” I said.

The next night the retreat started. We heard that Germans and Austrians
had broken through in the north and were coming down the mountain
valleys toward Cividale and Udine. The retreat was orderly, wet and
sullen. In the night, going slowly along the crowded roads we passed
troops marching under the rain, guns, horses pulling wagons, mules,
motor trucks, all moving away from the front. There was no more disorder
than in an advance.

That night we helped empty the field hospitals that had been set up in
the least ruined villages of the plateau, taking the wounded down to
Plava on the river-bed: and the next day hauled all day in the rain to
evacuate the hospitals and clearing station at Plava. It rained steadily
and the army of the Bainsizza moved down off the plateau in the October
rain and across the river where the great victories had commenced in the
spring of that year. We came into Gorizia in the middle of the next day.
The rain had stopped and the town was nearly empty. As we came up the
street they were loading the girls from the soldiers’ whorehouse into a
truck. There were seven girls and they had on their hats and coats and
carried small suitcases. Two of them were crying. Of the others one
smiled at us and put out her tongue and fluttered it up and down. She
had thick full lips and black eyes.

I stopped the car and went over and spoke to the matron. The girls from
the officers’ house had left early that morning, she said. Where were
they going? To Conegliano, she said. The truck started. The girl with
thick lips put out her tongue again at us. The matron waved. The two
girls kept on crying. The others looked interestedly out at the town. I
got back in the car.

“We ought to go with them,” Bonello said. “That would be a good trip.”

“We’ll have a good trip,” I said.

“We’ll have a hell of a trip.”

“That’s what I mean,” I said. We came up the drive to the villa.

“I’d like to be there when some of those tough babies climb in and try
and hop them.”

“You think they will?”

“Sure. Everybody in the Second Army knows that matron.”

We were outside the villa.

“They call her the Mother Superior,” Bonello said. “The girls are new
but everybody knows her. They must have brought them up just before the
retreat.”

“They’ll have a time.”

“I’ll say they’ll have a time. I’d like to have a crack at them for
nothing. They charge too much at that house anyway. The government gyps
us.”

“Take the car out and have the mechanics go over it,” I said. “Change
the oil and check the differential. Fill it up and then get some sleep.”

“Yes, Signor Tenente.”

The villa was empty. Rinaldi was gone with the hospital. The major was
gone taking hospital personnel in the staff car. There was a note on the
window for me to fill the cars with the material piled in the hall and
to proceed to Pordenone. The mechanics were gone already. I went out
back to the garage. The other two cars came in while I was there and
their drivers got down. It was starting to rain again.

“I’m so —— sleepy I went to sleep three times coming here from Plava,”
Piani said. “What are we going to do, Tenente?”

“We’ll change the oil, grease them, fill them up, then take them around
in front and load up the junk they’ve left.”

“Then do we start?”

“No, we’ll sleep for three hours.”

“Christ I’m glad to sleep,” Bonello said. “I couldn’t keep awake
driving.”

“How’s your car, Aymo?” I asked.

“It’s all right.”

“Get me a monkey suit and I’ll help you with the oil.”

“Don’t you do that, Tenente,” Aymo said. “It’s nothing to do. You go and
pack your things.”

“My things are all packed,” I said. “I’ll go and carry out the stuff
that they left for us. Bring the cars around as soon as they’re ready.”

They brought the cars around to the front of the villa and we loaded
them with the hospital equipment which was piled in the hallway. When it
was all in, the three cars stood in line down the driveway under the
trees in the rain. We went inside.

“Make a fire in the kitchen and dry your things,” I said.

“I don’t care about dry clothes,” Piani said. “I want to sleep.”

“I’m going to sleep on the major’s bed,” Bonello said. “I’m going to
sleep where the old man corks off.”

“I don’t care where I sleep,” Piani said.

“There are two beds in here.” I opened the door.

“I never knew what was in that room,” Bonello said.

“That was old fish-face’s room,” Piani said.

“You two sleep in there,” I said. “I’ll wake you.”

“The Austrians will wake us if you sleep too long, Tenente,” Bonello
said.

“I won’t oversleep,” I said. “Where’s Aymo?”

“He went out in the kitchen.”

“Get to sleep,” I said.

“I’ll sleep,” Piani said. “I’ve been asleep sitting up all day. The
whole top of my head kept coming down over my eyes.”

“Take your boots off,” Bonello said. “That’s old fish-face’s bed.”

“Fish-face is nothing to me.” Piani lay on the bed, his muddy boots
straight out, his head on his arm. I went out to the kitchen. Aymo had a
fire in the stove and a kettle of water on.

“I thought I’d start some _pasta asciutta_,” he said. “We’ll be hungry
when we wake up.”

“Aren’t you sleepy, Bartolomeo?”

“Not so sleepy. When the water boils I’ll leave it. The fire will go
down.”

“You’d better get some sleep,” I said. “We can eat cheese and monkey
meat.”

“This is better,” he said. “Something hot will be good for those two
anarchists. You go to sleep, Tenente.”

“There’s a bed in the major’s room.”

“You sleep there.”

“No, I’m going up to my old room. Do you want a drink, Bartolomeo?”

“When we go, Tenente. Now it wouldn’t do me any good.”

“If you wake in three hours and I haven’t called you, wake me, will
you?”

“I haven’t any watch, Tenente.”

“There’s a clock on the wall in the major’s room.”

“All right.”

I went out then through the dining-room and the hall and up the marble
stairs to the room where I had lived with Rinaldi. It was raining
outside. I went to the window and looked out. It was getting dark and I
saw the three cars standing in line under the trees. The trees were
dripping in the rain. It was cold and the drops hung to the branches. I
went back to Rinaldi’s bed and lay down and let sleep take me.

We ate in the kitchen before we started. Aymo had a basin of spaghetti
with onions and tinned meat chopped up in it. We sat around the table
and drank two bottles of the wine that had been left in the cellar of
the villa. It was dark outside and still raining. Piani sat at the table
very sleepy.

“I like a retreat better than an advance,” Bonello said. “On a retreat
we drink barbera.”

“We drink it now. To-morrow maybe we drink rain-water,” Aymo said.

“To-morrow we’ll be in Udine. We’ll drink champagne. That’s where the
slackers live. Wake up, Piani! We’ll drink champagne to-morrow in
Udine!”

“I’m awake,” Piani said. He filled his plate with the spaghetti and
meat. “Couldn’t you find tomato sauce, Barto?”

“There wasn’t any,” Aymo said.

“We’ll drink champagne in Udine,” Bonello said. He filled his glass with
the clear red barbera.

“We may drink —— before Udine,” Piani said.

“Have you eaten enough, Tenente?” Aymo asked.

“I’ve got plenty. Give me the bottle, Bartolomeo.”

“I have a bottle apiece to take in the cars,” Aymo said.

“Did you sleep at all?”

“I don’t need much sleep. I slept a little.”

“To-morrow we’ll sleep in the king’s bed,” Bonello said. He was feeling
very good.

“To-morrow maybe we’ll sleep in ——,” Piani said.

“I’ll sleep with the queen,” Bonello said. He looked to see how I took
the joke.

“You’ll sleep with ——,” Piani said sleepily.

“That’s treason, Tenente,” Bonello said. “Isn’t that treason?”

“Shut up,” I said. “You get too funny with a little wine.” Outside it
was raining hard. I looked at my watch. It was half-past nine.

“It’s time to roll,” I said and stood up.

“Who are you going to ride with, Tenente?” Bonello asked.

“With Aymo. Then you come. Then Piani. We’ll start out on the road for
Cormons.”

“I’m afraid I’ll go to sleep,” Piani said.

“All right. I’ll ride with you. Then Bonello. Then Aymo.”

“That’s the best way,” Piani said. “Because I’m so sleepy.”

“I’ll drive and you sleep awhile.”

“No. I can drive just so long as I know somebody will wake me up if I go
to sleep.”

“I’ll wake you up. Put out the lights, Barto.”

“You might as well leave them,” Bonello said. “We’ve got no more use for
this place.”

“I have a small locker trunk in my room,” I said. “Will you help take it
down, Piani?”

“We’ll take it,” Piani said. “Come on, Aldo.” He went off into the hall
with Bonello. I heard them going upstairs.

“This was a fine place,” Bartolomeo Aymo said. He put two bottles of
wine and half a cheese into his haversack. “There won’t be a place like
this again. Where will they retreat to, Tenente?”

“Beyond the Tagliamento, they say. The hospital and the sector are to be
at Pordenone.”

“This is a better town than Pordenone.”

“I don’t know Pordenone,” I said. “I’ve just been through there.”

“It’s not much of a place,” Aymo said.




                             CHAPTER XXVIII

As we moved out through the town it was empty in the rain and the dark
except for columns of troops and guns that were going through the main
street. There were many trucks too and some carts going through on other
streets and converging on the main road. When we were out past the
tanneries onto the main road the troops, the motor trucks, the
horse-drawn carts and the guns were in one wide slow-moving column. We
moved slowly but steadily in the rain, the radiator cap of our car
almost against the tailboard of a truck that was loaded high, the load
covered with wet canvas. Then the truck stopped. The whole column was
stopped. It started again and we went a little farther, then stopped. I
got out and walked ahead, going between the trucks and carts and under
the wet necks of the horses. The block was farther ahead. I left the
road, crossed the ditch on a footboard and walked along the field beyond
the ditch. I could see the stalled column between the trees in the rain
as I went forward across from it in the field. I went about a mile. The
column did not move, although, on the other side beyond the stalled
vehicles I could see the troops moving. I went back to the cars. This
block might extend as far as Udine. Piani was asleep over the wheel. I
climbed up beside him and went to sleep too. Several hours later I heard
the truck ahead of us grinding into gear. I woke Piani and we started,
moving a few yards, then stopping, then going on again. It was still
raining.

The column stalled again in the night and did not start. I got down and
went back to see Aymo and Bonello. Bonello had two sergeants of
engineers on the seat of his car with him. They stiffened when I came
up.

“They were left to do something to a bridge,” Bonello said. “They can’t
find their unit so I gave them a ride.”

“With the Sir Lieutenant’s permission.”

“With permission,” I said.

“The lieutenant is an American,” Bonello said. “He’ll give anybody a
ride.”

One of the sergeants smiled. The other asked Bonello if I was an Italian
from North or South America.

“He’s not an Italian. He’s North American English.”

The sergeants were polite but did not believe it. I left them and went
back to Aymo. He had two girls on the seat with him and was sitting back
in the corner and smoking.

“Barto, Barto,” I said. He laughed.

“Talk to them, Tenente,” he said. “I can’t understand them. Hey!” he put
his hand on the girl’s thigh and squeezed it in a friendly way. The girl
drew her shawl tight around her and pushed his hand away. “Hey!” he
said. “Tell the Tenente your name and what you’re doing here.”

The girl looked at me fiercely. The other girl kept her eyes down. The
girl who looked at me said something in a dialect I could not understand
a word of. She was plump and dark and looked about sixteen.

“Sorella?” I asked and pointed at the other girl.

She nodded her head and smiled.

“All right,” I said and patted her knee. I felt her stiffen away when I
touched her. The sister never looked up. She looked perhaps a year
younger. Aymo put his hand on the elder girl’s thigh and she pushed it
away. He laughed at her.

“Good man,” he pointed at himself. “Good man,” he pointed at me. “Don’t
you worry.” The girl looked at him fiercely. The pair of them were like
two wild birds.

“What does she ride with me for if she doesn’t like me?” Aymo asked.
“They got right up in the car the minute I motioned to them.” He turned
to the girl. “Don’t worry,” he said. “No danger of ——,” using the
vulgar word. “No place for ——.” I could see she understood the word
and that was all. Her eyes looked at him very scared. She pulled the
shawl tight. “Car all full,” Aymo said. “No danger of ——. No place for
——.” Every time he said the word the girl stiffened a little. Then
sitting stiffly and looking at him she began to cry. I saw her lips
working and then tears came down her plump cheeks. Her sister, not
looking up, took her hand and they sat there together. The older one,
who had been so fierce, began to sob.

“I guess I scared her,” Aymo said. “I didn’t mean to scare her.”

Bartolomeo brought out his knapsack and cut off two pieces of cheese.
“Here,” he said. “Stop crying.”

The older girl shook her head and still cried, but the younger girl took
the cheese and commenced to eat. After a while the younger girl gave her
sister the second piece of cheese and they both ate. The older sister
still sobbed a little.

“She’ll be all right after a while,” Aymo said.

An idea came to him. “Virgin?” he asked the girl next to him. She nodded
her head vigorously. “Virgin too?” he pointed to the sister. Both the
girls nodded their heads and the elder said something in dialect.

“That’s all right,” Bartolomeo said. “That’s all right.”

Both the girls seemed cheered.

I left them sitting together with Aymo sitting back in the corner and
went back to Piani’s car. The column of vehicles did not move but the
troops kept passing alongside. It was still raining hard and I thought
some of the stops in the movement of the column might be from cars with
wet wiring. More likely they were from horses or men going to sleep.
Still, traffic could tie up in cities when every one was awake. It was
the combination of horse and motor vehicles. They did not help each
other any. The peasants’ carts did not help much either. Those were a
couple of fine girls with Barto. A retreat was no place for two virgins.
Real virgins. Probably very religious. If there were no war we would
probably all be in bed. In bed I lay me down my head. Bed and board.
Stiff as a board in bed. Catherine was in bed now between two sheets,
over her and under her. Which side did she sleep on? Maybe she wasn’t
asleep. Maybe she was lying thinking about me. Blow, blow, ye western
wind. Well, it blew and it wasn’t the small rain but the big rain down
that rained. It rained all night. You knew it rained down that rained.
Look at it. Christ, that my love were in my arms and I in my bed again.
That my love Catherine. That my sweet love Catherine down might rain.
Blow her again to me. Well, we were in it. Every one was caught in it
and the small rain would not quiet it. “Good-night, Catherine,” I said
out loud. “I hope you sleep well. If it’s too uncomfortable, darling,
lie on the other side,” I said. “I’ll get you some cold water. In a
little while it will be morning and then it won’t be so bad. I’m sorry
he makes you so uncomfortable. Try and go to sleep, sweet.”

I was asleep all the time, she said. You’ve been talking in your sleep.
Are you all right?

Are you really there?

Of course I’m here. I wouldn’t go way. This doesn’t make any difference
between us.

You’re so lovely and sweet. You wouldn’t go away in the night, would
you?

Of course I wouldn’t go away. I’m always here. I come whenever you want
me.

“——,” Piani said. “They’ve started again.”

“I was dopey,” I said. I looked at my watch. It was three o’clock in the
morning. I reached back behind the seat for a bottle of the barbera.

“You talked out loud,” Piani said.

“I was having a dream in English,” I said.

The rain was slacking and we were moving along. Before daylight we were
stalled again and when it was light we were at a little rise in the
ground and I saw the road of the retreat stretched out far ahead,
everything stationary except for the infantry filtering through. We
started to move again but seeing the rate of progress in the daylight, I
knew we were going to have to get off that main road some way and go
across country if we ever hoped to reach Udine.

In the night many peasants had joined the column from the roads of the
country and in the column there were carts loaded with household goods;
there were mirrors projecting up between mattresses, and chickens and
ducks tied to carts. There was a sewing-machine on the cart ahead of us
in the rain. They had saved the most valuable things. On some carts the
women sat huddled from the rain and others walked beside the carts
keeping as close to them as they could. There were dogs now in the
column, keeping under the wagons as they moved along. The road was
muddy, the ditches at the side were high with water and beyond the trees
that lined the road the fields looked too wet and too soggy to try to
cross. I got down from the car and worked up the road a way, looking for
a place where I could see ahead to find a side-road we could take across
country. I knew there were many side-roads but did not want one that
would lead to nothing. I could not remember them because we had always
passed them bowling along in the car on the main road and they all
looked much alike. Now I knew we must find one if we hoped to get
through. No one knew where the Austrians were nor how things were going
but I was certain that if the rain should stop and planes come over and
get to work on that column that it would be all over. All that was
needed was for a few men to leave their trucks or a few horses be killed
to tie up completely the movement on the road.

The rain was not falling so heavily now and I thought it might clear. I
went ahead along the edge of the road and when there was a small road
that led off to the north between two fields with a hedge of trees on
both sides, I thought that we had better take it and hurried back to the
cars. I told Piani to turn off and went back to tell Bonello and Aymo.

“If it leads nowhere we can turn around and cut back in,” I said.

“What about these?” Bonello asked. His two sergeants were beside him on
the seat. They were unshaven but still military looking in the early
morning.

“They’ll be good to push,” I said. I went back to Aymo and told him we
were going to try it across country.

“What about my virgin family?” Aymo asked. The two girls were asleep.

“They won’t be very useful,” I said. “You ought to have some one that
could push.”

“They could go back in the car,” Aymo said. “There’s room in the car.”

“All right if you want them,” I said. “Pick up somebody with a wide back
to push.”

“Bersaglieri,” Aymo smiled. “They have the widest backs. They measure
them. How do you feel, Tenente?”

“Fine. How are you?”

“Fine. But very hungry.”

“There ought to be something up that road and we will stop and eat.”

“How’s your leg, Tenente?”

“Fine,” I said. Standing on the step and looking up ahead I could see
Piani’s car pulling out onto the little side-road and starting up it,
his car showing through the hedge of bare branches. Bonello turned off
and followed him and then Piani worked his way out and we followed the
two ambulances ahead along the narrow road between hedges. It led to a
farmhouse. We found Piani and Bonello stopped in the farmyard. The house
was low and long with a trellis with a grape-vine over the door. There
was a well in the yard and Piani was getting up water to fill his
radiator. So much going in low gear had boiled it out. The farmhouse was
deserted. I looked back down the road, the farmhouse was on a slight
elevation above the plain, and we could see over the country, and saw
the road, the hedges, the fields and the line of trees along the main
road where the retreat was passing. The two sergeants were looking
through the house. The girls were awake and looking at the courtyard,
the well and the two big ambulances in front of the farmhouse, with
three drivers at the well. One of the sergeants came out with a clock in
his hand.

“Put it back,” I said. He looked at me, went in the house and came back
without the clock.

“Where’s your partner?” I asked.

“He’s gone to the latrine.” He got up on the seat of the ambulance. He
was afraid we would leave him.

“What about breakfast, Tenente?” Bonello asked. “We could eat something.
It wouldn’t take very long.”

“Do you think this road going down on the other side will lead to
anything?”

“Sure.”

“All right. Let’s eat.” Piani and Bonello went in the house.

“Come on,” Aymo said to the girls. He held his hand to help them down.
The older sister shook her head. They were not going into any deserted
house. They looked after us.

“They are difficult,” Aymo said. We went into the farmhouse together. It
was large and dark, an abandoned feeling. Bonello and Piani were in the
kitchen.

“There’s not much to eat,” Piani said. “They’ve cleaned it out.”

Bonello sliced a big white cheese on the heavy kitchen table.

“Where was the cheese?”

“In the cellar. Piani found wine too and apples.”

“That’s a good breakfast.”

Piani was taking the wooden cork out of a big wicker-covered wine jug.
He tipped it and poured a copper pan full.

“It smells all right,” he said. “Find some beakers, Barto.”

The two sergeants came in.

“Have some cheese, sergeants,” Bonello said.

“We should go,” one of the sergeants said, eating his cheese and
drinking a cup of wine.

“We’ll go. Don’t worry,” Bonello said.

“An army travels on its stomach,” I said.

“What?” asked the sergeant.

“It’s better to eat.”

“Yes. But time is precious.”

“I believe the bastards have eaten already,” Piani said. The sergeants
looked at him. They hated the lot of us.

“You know the road?” one of them asked me.

“No,” I said. They looked at each other.

“We would do best to start,” the first one said.

“We are starting,” I said. I drank another cup of the red wine. It
tasted very good after the cheese and apple.

“Bring the cheese,” I said and went out. Bonello came out carrying the
great jug of wine.

“That’s too big,” I said. He looked at it regretfully.

“I guess it is,” he said. “Give me the canteens to fill.” He filled the
canteens and some of the wine ran out on the stone paving of the
courtyard. Then he picked up the wine jug and put it just inside the
door.

“The Austrians can find it without breaking the door down,” he said.

“We’ll roll,” I said. “Piani and I will go ahead.” The two engineers
were already on the seat beside Bonello. The girls were eating cheese
and apples. Aymo was smoking. We started off down the narrow road. I
looked back at the two cars coming and the farmhouse. It was a fine,
low, solid stone house and the ironwork of the well was very good. Ahead
of us the road was narrow and muddy and there was a high hedge on either
side. Behind, the cars were following closely.




                              CHAPTER XXIX

At noon we were stuck in a muddy road about, as nearly as we could
figure, ten kilometres from Udine. The rain had stopped during the
forenoon and three times we had heard planes coming, seen them pass
overhead, watched them go far to the left and heard them bombing on the
main highroad. We had worked through a network of secondary roads and
had taken many roads that were blind, but had always, by backing up and
finding another road, gotten closer to Udine. Now, Aymo’s car, in
backing so that we might get out of a blind road, had gotten into the
soft earth at the side and the wheels, spinning, had dug deeper and
deeper until the car rested on its differential. The thing to do now was
to dig out in front of the wheels, put in brush so that the chains could
grip, and then push until the car was on the road. We were all down on
the road around the car. The two sergeants looked at the car and
examined the wheels. Then they started off down the road without a word.
I went after them.

“Come on,” I said. “Cut some brush.”

“We have to go,” one said.

“Get busy,” I said, “and cut brush.”

“We have to go,” one said. The other said nothing. They were in a hurry
to start. They would not look at me.

“I order you to come back to the car and cut brush,” I said. The one
sergeant turned. “We have to go on. In a little while you will be cut
off. You can’t order us. You’re not our officer.”

“I order you to cut brush,” I said. They turned and started down the
road.

“Halt,” I said. They kept on down the muddy road, the hedge on either
side. “I order you to halt,” I called. They went a little faster. I
opened up my holster, took the pistol, aimed at the one who had talked
the most, and fired. I missed and they both started to run. I shot three
times and dropped one. The other went through the hedge and was out of
sight. I fired at him through the hedge as he ran across the field. The
pistol clicked empty and I put in another clip. I saw it was too far to
shoot at the second sergeant. He was far across the field, running, his
head held low. I commenced to reload the empty clip. Bonello came up.

“Let me go finish him,” he said. I handed him the pistol and he walked
down to where the sergeant of engineers lay face down across the road.
Bonello leaned over, put the pistol against the man’s head and pulled
the trigger. The pistol did not fire.

“You have to cock it,” I said. He cocked it and fired twice. He took
hold of the sergeant’s legs and pulled him to the side of the road so he
lay beside the hedge. He came back and handed me the pistol.

“The son of a bitch,” he said. He looked toward the sergeant. “You see
me shoot him, Tenente?”

“We’ve got to get the brush quickly,” I said. “Did I hit the other one
at all?”

“I don’t think so,” Aymo said. “He was too far away to hit with a
pistol.”

“The dirty scum,” Piani said. We were all cutting twigs and branches.
Everything had been taken out of the car. Bonello was digging out in
front of the wheels. When we were ready Aymo started the car and put it
into gear. The wheels spun round throwing brush and mud. Bonello and I
pushed until we could feel our joints crack. The car would not move.

“Rock her back and forth, Barto,” I said.

He drove the engine in reverse, then forward. The wheels only dug in
deeper. Then the car was resting on the differential again, and the
wheels spun freely in the holes they had dug. I straightened up.

“We’ll try her with a rope,” I said.

“I don’t think it’s any use, Tenente. You can’t get a straight pull.”

“We have to try it,” I said. “She won’t come out any other way.”

Piani’s and Bonello’s cars could only move straight ahead down the
narrow road. We roped both cars together and pulled. The wheels only
pulled sideways against the ruts.

“It’s no good,” I shouted. “Stop it.”

Piani and Bonello got down from their cars and came back. Aymo got down.
The girls were up the road about forty yards sitting on a stone wall.

“What do you say, Tenente?” Bonello asked.

“We’ll dig out and try once more with the brush,” I said. I looked down
the road. It was my fault. I had led them up here. The sun was almost
out from behind the clouds and the body of the sergeant lay beside the
hedge.

“We’ll put his coat and cape under,” I said. Bonello went to get them. I
cut brush and Aymo and Piani dug out in front and between the wheels. I
cut the cape, then ripped it in two, and laid it under the wheel in the
mud, then piled brush for the wheels to catch. We were ready to start
and Aymo got up on the seat and started the car. The wheels spun and we
pushed and pushed. But it wasn’t any use.

“It’s ——ed,” I said. “Is there anything you want in the car, Barto?”

Aymo climbed up with Bonello, carrying the cheese and two bottles of
wine and his cape. Bonello, sitting behind the wheel, was looking
through the pockets of the sergeant’s coat.

“Better throw the coat away,” I said. “What about Barto’s virgins?”

“They can get in the back,” Piani said. “I don’t think we are going
far.”

I opened the back door of the ambulance.

“Come on,” I said. “Get in.” The two girls climbed in and sat in the
corner. They seemed to have taken no notice of the shooting. I looked
back up the road. The sergeant lay in his dirty long-sleeved underwear.
I got up with Piani and we started. We were going to try to cross the
field. When the road entered the field I got down and walked ahead. If
we could get across, there was a road on the other side. We could not
get across. It was too soft and muddy for the cars. When they were
finally and completely stalled, the wheels dug in to the hubs, we left
them in the field and started on foot for Udine.

When we came to the road which led back toward the main highway I
pointed down it to the two girls.

“Go down there,” I said. “You’ll meet people.” They looked at me. I took
out my pocket-book and gave them each a ten-lira note. “Go down there,”
I said, pointing. “Friends! Family!”

They did not understand but they held the money tightly and started down
the road. They looked back as though they were afraid I might take the
money back. I watched them go down the road, their shawls close around
them, looking back apprehensively at us. The three drivers were
laughing.

“How much will you give me to go in that direction, Tenente?” Bonello
asked.

“They’re better off in a bunch of people than alone if they catch them,”
I said.

“Give me two hundred lire and I’ll walk straight back toward Austria,”
Bonello said.

“They’d take it away from you,” Piani said.

“Maybe the war will be over,” Aymo said. We were going up the road as
fast as we could. The sun was trying to come through. Beside the road
were mulberry trees. Through the trees I could see our two big
moving-vans of cars stuck in the field. Piani looked back too.

“They’ll have to build a road to get them out,” he said.

“I wish to Christ we had bicycles,” Bonello said.

“Do they ride bicycles in America?” Aymo asked.

“They used to.”

“Here it is a great thing,” Aymo said. “A bicycle is a splendid thing.”

“I wish to Christ we had bicycles,” Bonello said. “I’m no walker.”

“Is that firing?” I asked. I thought I could hear firing a long way
away.

“I don’t know,” Aymo said. He listened.

“I think so,” I said.

“The first thing we will see will be the cavalry,” Piani said.

“I don’t think they’ve got any cavalry.”

“I hope to Christ not,” Bonello said. “I don’t want to be stuck on a
lance by any —— cavalry.”

“You certainly shot that sergeant, Tenente,” Piani said. We were walking
fast.

“I killed him,” Bonello said. “I never killed anybody in this war, and
all my life I’ve wanted to kill a sergeant.”

“You killed him on the sit all right,” Piani said. “He wasn’t flying
very fast when you killed him.”

“Never mind. That’s one thing I can always remember. I killed that ——
of a sergeant.”

“What will you say in confession?” Aymo asked.

“I’ll say, ‘Bless me, father, I killed a sergeant.’” They all laughed.

“He’s an anarchist,” Piani said. “He doesn’t go to church.”

“Piani’s an anarchist too,” Bonello said.

“Are you really anarchists?” I asked.

“No, Tenente. We’re socialists. We come from Imola.”

“Haven’t you ever been there?”

“No.”

“By Christ it’s a fine place, Tenente. You come there after the war and
we’ll show you something.”

“Are you all socialists?”

“Everybody.”

“Is it a fine town?”

“Wonderful. You never saw a town like that.”

“How did you get to be socialists?”

“We’re all socialists. Everybody is a socialist. We’ve always been
socialists.”

“You come, Tenente. We’ll make you a socialist too.”

Ahead the road turned off to the left and there was a little hill and,
beyond a stone wall, an apple orchard. As the road went uphill they
ceased talking. We walked along together all going fast against time.




                              CHAPTER XXX

Later we were on a road that led to a river. There was a long line of
abandoned trucks and carts on the road leading up to the bridge. No one
was in sight. The river was high and the bridge had been blown up in the
centre; the stone arch was fallen into the river and the brown water was
going over it. We went on up the bank looking for a place to cross. Up
ahead I knew there was a railway bridge and I thought we might be able
to get across there. The path was wet and muddy. We did not see any
troops; only abandoned trucks and stores. Along the river bank there was
nothing and no one but the wet brush and muddy ground. We went up to the
bank and finally we saw the railway bridge.

“What a beautiful bridge,” Aymo said. It was a long plain iron bridge
across what was usually a dry river-bed.

“We better hurry and get across before they blow it up,” I said.

“There’s nobody to blow it up,” Piani said. “They’re all gone.”

“It’s probably mined,” Bonello said. “You cross first, Tenente.”

“Listen to the anarchist,” Aymo said. “Make him go first.”

“I’ll go,” I said. “It won’t be mined to blow up with one man.”

“You see,” Piani said. “That is brains. Why haven’t you brains,
anarchist?”

“If I had brains I wouldn’t be here,” Bonello said.

“That’s pretty good, Tenente,” Aymo said.

“That’s pretty good,” I said. We were close to the bridge now. The sky
had clouded over again and it was raining a little. The bridge looked
long and solid. We climbed up the embankment.

“Come one at a time,” I said and started across the bridge. I watched
the ties and the rails for any tripwires or signs of explosive but I saw
nothing. Down below the gaps in the ties the river ran muddy and fast.
Ahead across the wet countryside I could see Udine in the rain. Across
the bridge I looked back. Just up the river was another bridge. As I
watched, a yellow mud-colored motor car crossed it. The sides of the
bridge were high and the body of the car, once on, was out of sight. But
I saw the heads of the driver, the man on the seat with him, and the two
men on the rear seat. They all wore German helmets. Then the car was
over the bridge and out of sight behind the trees and the abandoned
vehicles on the road. I waved to Aymo who was crossing and to the others
to come on. I climbed down and crouched beside the railway embankment.
Aymo came down with me.

“Did you see the car?” I asked.

“No. We were watching you.”

“A German staff car crossed on the upper bridge.”

“A staff car?”

“Yes.”

“Holy Mary.”

The others came and we all crouched in the mud behind the embankment,
looking across the rails at the bridge, the line of trees, the ditch and
the road.

“Do you think we’re cut off then, Tenente?”

“I don’t know. All I know is a German staff car went along that road.”

“You don’t feel funny, Tenente? You haven’t got strange feelings in the
head?”

“Don’t be funny, Bonello.”

“What about a drink?” Piani asked. “If we’re cut off we might as well
have a drink.” He unhooked his canteen and uncorked it.

“Look! Look!” Aymo said and pointed toward the road. Along the top of
the stone bridge we could see German helmets moving. They were bent
forward and moved smoothly, almost supernaturally, along. As they came
off the bridge we saw them. They were bicycle troops. I saw the faces of
the first two. They were ruddy and healthy-looking. Their helmets came
low down over their foreheads and the side of their faces. Their
carbines were clipped to the frame of the bicycles. Stick bombs hung
handle down from their belts. Their helmets and their gray uniforms were
wet and they rode easily, looking ahead and to both sides. There were
two—then four in line, then two, then almost a dozen; then another
dozen—then one alone. They did not talk but we could not have heard
them because of the noise from the river. They were gone out of sight up
the road.

“Holy Mary,” Aymo said.

“They were Germans,” Piani said. “Those weren’t Austrians.”

“Why isn’t there somebody here to stop them?” I said. “Why haven’t they
blown the bridge up? Why aren’t there machine-guns along this
embankment?”

“You tell us, Tenente,” Bonello said.

I was very angry.

“The whole bloody thing is crazy. Down below they blow up a little
bridge. Here they leave a bridge on the main road. Where is everybody?
Don’t they try and stop them at all?”

“You tell us, Tenente,” Bonello said. I shut up. It was none of my
business; all I had to do was to get to Pordenone with three ambulances.
I had failed at that. All I had to do now was get to Pordenone. I
probably could not even get to Udine. The hell I couldn’t. The thing to
do was to be calm and not get shot or captured.

“Didn’t you have a canteen open?” I asked Piani. He handed it to me. I
took a long drink. “We might as well start,” I said. “There’s no hurry
though. Do you want to eat something?”

“This is no place to stay,” Bonello said.

“All right. We’ll start.”

“Should we keep on this side—out of sight?”

“We’ll be better off on top. They may come along this bridge too. We
don’t want them on top of us before we see them.”

We walked along the railroad track. On both sides of us stretched the
wet plain. Ahead across the plain was the hill of Udine. The roofs fell
away from the castle on the hill. We could see the campanile and the
clock-tower. There were many mulberry trees in the fields. Ahead I saw a
place where the rails were torn up. The ties had been dug out too and
thrown down the embankment.

“Down! down!” Aymo said. We dropped down beside the embankment. There
was another group of bicyclists passing along the road. I looked over
the edge and saw them go on.

“They saw us but they went on,” Aymo said.

“We’ll get killed up there, Tenente,” Bonello said.

“They don’t want us,” I said. “They’re after something else. We’re in
more danger if they should come on us suddenly.”

“I’d rather walk here out of sight,” Bonello said.

“All right. We’ll walk along the tracks.”

“Do you think we can get through?” Aymo asked.

“Sure. There aren’t very many of them yet. We’ll go through in the
dark.”

“What was that staff car doing?”

“Christ knows,” I said. We kept on up the tracks. Bonello tired of
walking in the mud of the embankment and came up with the rest of us.
The railway moved south away from the highway now and we could not see
what passed along the road. A short bridge over a canal was blown up but
we climbed across on what was left of the span. We heard firing ahead of
us.

We came up on the railway beyond the canal. It went on straight toward
the town across the low fields. We could see the line of the other
railway ahead of us. To the north was the main road where we had seen
the cyclists; to the south there was a small branch-road across the
fields with thick trees on each side. I thought we had better cut to the
south and work around the town that way and across country toward
Campoformio and the main road to the Tagliamento. We could avoid the
main line of the retreat by keeping to the secondary roads beyond Udine.
I knew there were plenty of side-roads across the plain. I started down
the embankment.

“Come on,” I said. We would make for the side-road and work to the south
of the town. We all started down the embankment. A shot was fired at us
from the side-road. The bullet went into the mud of the embankment.

“Go on back,” I shouted. I started up the embankment, slipping in the
mud. The drivers were ahead of me. I went up the embankment as fast as I
could go. Two more shots came from the thick brush and Aymo, as he was
crossing the tracks, lurched, tripped and fell face down. We pulled him
down on the other side and turned him over. “His head ought to be
uphill,” I said. Piani moved him around. He lay in the mud on the side
of the embankment, his feet pointing downhill, breathing blood
irregularly. The three of us squatted over him in the rain. He was hit
low in the back of the neck and the bullet had ranged upward and come
out under the right eye. He died while I was stopping up the two holes.
Piani laid his head down, wiped at his face, with a piece of the
emergency dressing, then let it alone.

“The ——,” he said.

“They weren’t Germans,” I said. “There can’t be any Germans over there.”

“Italians,” Piani said, using the word as an epithet, “Italiani!”
Bonello said nothing. He was sitting beside Aymo, not looking at him.
Piani picked up Aymo’s cap where it had rolled down the embankment and
put it over his face. He took out his canteen.

“Do you want a drink?” Piani handed Bonello the canteen.

“No,” Bonello said. He turned to me. “That might have happened to us any
time on the railway tracks.”

“No,” I said. “It was because we started across the field.”

Bonello shook his head. “Aymo’s dead,” he said. “Who’s dead next,
Tenente? Where do we go now?”

“Those were Italians that shot,” I said. “They weren’t Germans.”

“I suppose if they were Germans they’d have killed all of us,” Bonello
said.

“We are in more danger from Italians than Germans,” I said. “The rear
guard are afraid of everything. The Germans know what they’re after.”

“You reason it out, Tenente,” Bonello said.

“Where do we go now?” Piani asked.

“We better lie up some place till it’s dark. If we could get south we’d
be all right.”

“They’d have to shoot us all to prove they were right the first time,”
Bonello said. “I’m not going to try them.”

“We’ll find a place to lie up as near to Udine as we can get and then go
through when it’s dark.”

“Let’s go then,” Bonello said. We went down the north side of the
embankment. I looked back. Aymo lay in the mud with the angle of the
embankment. He was quite small and his arms were by his side, his
puttee-wrapped legs and muddy boots together, his cap over his face. He
looked very dead. It was raining. I had liked him as well as any one I
ever knew. I had his papers in my pocket and would write to his family.
Ahead across the fields was a farmhouse. There were trees around it and
the farm buildings were built against the house. There was a balcony
along the second floor held up by columns.

“We better keep a little way apart,” I said. “I’ll go ahead.” I started
toward the farmhouse. There was a path across the field.

Crossing the field, I did not know but that some one would fire on us
from the trees near the farmhouse or from the farmhouse itself. I walked
toward it, seeing it very clearly. The balcony of the second floor
merged into the barn and there was hay coming out between the columns.
The courtyard was of stone blocks and all the trees were dripping with
the rain. There was a big empty two-wheeled cart, the shafts tipped high
up in the rain. I came to the courtyard, crossed it, and stood under the
shelter of the balcony. The door of the house was open and I went in.
Bonello and Piani came in after me. It was dark inside. I went back to
the kitchen. There were ashes of a fire on the big open hearth. The pots
hung over the ashes, but they were empty. I looked around but I could
not find anything to eat.

“We ought to lie up in the barn,” I said. “Do you think you could find
anything to eat, Piani, and bring it up there?”

“I’ll look,” Piani said.

“I’ll look too,” Bonello said.

“All right,” I said. “I’ll go up and look at the barn.” I found a stone
stairway that went up from the stable underneath. The stable smelt dry
and pleasant in the rain. The cattle were all gone, probably driven off
when they left. The barn was half full of hay. There were two windows in
the roof, one was blocked with boards, the other was a narrow dormer
window on the north side. There was a chute so that hay might be pitched
down to the cattle. Beams crossed the opening down into the main floor
where the hay-carts drove in when the hay was hauled in to be pitched
up. I heard the rain on the roof and smelled the hay and, when I went
down, the clean smell of dried dung in the stable. We could pry a board
loose and see out of the south window down into the courtyard. The other
window looked out on the field toward the north. We could get out of
either window onto the roof and down, or go down the hay chute if the
stairs were impractical. It was a big barn and we could hide in the hay
if we heard any one. It seemed like a good place. I was sure we could
have gotten through to the south if they had not fired on us. It was
impossible that there were Germans there. They were coming from the
north and down the road from Cividale. They could not have come through
from the south. The Italians were even more dangerous. They were
frightened and firing on anything they saw. Last night on the retreat we
had heard that there had been many Germans in Italian uniforms mixing
with the retreat in the north. I did not believe it. That was one of
those things you always heard in the war. It was one of the things the
enemy always did to you. You did not know any one who went over in
German uniform to confuse them. Maybe they did but it sounded difficult.
I did not believe the Germans did it. I did not believe they had to.
There was no need to confuse our retreat. The size of the army and the
fewness of the roads did that. Nobody gave any orders, let alone
Germans. Still, they would shoot us for Germans. They shot Aymo. The hay
smelled good and lying in a barn in the hay took away all the years in
between. We had lain in hay and talked and shot sparrows with an
air-rifle when they perched in the triangle cut high up in the wall of
the barn. The barn was gone now and one year they had cut the hemlock
woods and there were only stumps, dried tree-tops, branches and fireweed
where the woods had been. You could not go back. If you did not go
forward what happened? You never got back to Milan. And if you got back
to Milan what happened? I listened to the firing to the north toward
Udine. I could hear machine-gun firing. There was no shelling. That was
something. They must have gotten some troops along the road. I looked
down in the half-light of the hay-barn and saw Piani standing on the
hauling floor. He had a long sausage, a jar of something and two bottles
of wine under his arm.

“Come up,” I said. “There is the ladder.” Then I realized that I should
help him with the things and went down. I was vague in the head from
lying in the hay. I had been nearly asleep.

“Where’s Bonello?” I asked.

“I’ll tell you,” Piani said. We went up the ladder. Up on the hay we set
the things down. Piani took out his knife with the corkscrew and drew
the cork on a wine bottle.

“They have sealing-wax on it,” he said. “It must be good.” He smiled.

“Where’s Bonello?” I asked.

Piani looked at me.

“He went away, Tenente,” he said. “He wanted to be a prisoner.”

I did not say anything.

“He was afraid we would get killed.”

I held the bottle of wine and did not say anything.

“You see we don’t believe in the war anyway, Tenente.”

“Why didn’t you go?” I asked.

“I did not want to leave you.”

“Where did he go?”

“I don’t know, Tenente. He went away.”

“All right,” I said. “Will you cut the sausage?”

Piani looked at me in the half-light.

“I cut it while we were talking,” he said. We sat in the hay and ate the
sausage and drank the wine. It must have been wine they had saved for a
wedding. It was so old that it was losing its color.

“You look out of this window, Luigi,” I said. “I’ll go look out the
other window.”

We had each been drinking out of one of the bottles and I took my bottle
with me and went over and lay flat on the hay and looked out the narrow
window at the wet country. I do not know what I expected to see but I
did not see anything except the fields and the bare mulberry trees and
the rain falling. I drank the wine and it did not make me feel good.
They had kept it too long and it had gone to pieces and lost its quality
and color. I watched it get dark outside; the darkness came very
quickly. It would be a black night with the rain. When it was dark there
was no use watching any more, so I went over to Piani. He was lying
asleep and I did not wake him but sat down beside him for a while. He
was a big man and he slept heavily. After a while I woke him and we
started.

That was a very strange night. I do not know what I had expected, death
perhaps and shooting in the dark and running, but nothing happened. We
waited, lying flat beyond the ditch along the main road while a German
battalion passed, then when they were gone we crossed the road and went
on to the north. We were very close to Germans twice in the rain but
they did not see us. We got past the town to the north without seeing
any Italians, then after a while came on the main channels of the
retreat and walked all night toward the Tagliamento. I had not realized
how gigantic the retreat was. The whole country was moving, as well as
the army. We walked all night, making better time than the vehicles. My
leg ached and I was tired but we made good time. It seemed so silly for
Bonello to have decided to be taken prisoner. There was no danger. We
had walked through two armies without incident. If Aymo had not been
killed there would never have seemed to be any danger. No one had
bothered us when we were in plain sight along the railway. The killing
came suddenly and unreasonably. I wondered where Bonello was.

“How do you feel, Tenente?” Piani asked. We were going along the side of
a road crowded with vehicles and troops.

“Fine.”

“I’m tired of this walking.”

“Well, all we have to do is walk now. We don’t have to worry.”

“Bonello was a fool.”

“He was a fool all right.”

“What will you do about him, Tenente?”

“I don’t know.”

“Can’t you just put him down as taken prisoner?”

“I don’t know.”

“You see if the war went on they would make bad trouble for his family.”

“The war won’t go on,” a soldier said. “We’re going home. The war is
over.”

“Everybody’s going home.”

“We’re all going home.”

“Come on, Tenente,” Piani said. He wanted to get past them.

“Tenente? Who’s a Tenente? _A basso gli ufficiali!_ Down with the
officers!”

Piani took me by the arm. “I better call you by your name,” he said.
“They might try and make trouble. They’ve shot some officers.” We worked
up past them.

“I won’t make a report that will make trouble for his family.” I went on
with our conversation.

“If the war is over it makes no difference,” Piani said. “But I don’t
believe it’s over. It’s too good that it should be over.”

“We’ll know pretty soon,” I said.

“I don’t believe it’s over. They all think it’s over but I don’t believe
it.”

“_Viva la Pace!_” a soldier shouted out. “We’re going home!”

“It would be fine if we all went home,” Piani said. “Wouldn’t you like
to go home?”

“Yes.”

“We’ll never go. I don’t think it’s over.”

“_Andiamo a casa!_” a soldier shouted.

“They throw away their rifles,” Piani said. “They take them off and drop
them down while they’re marching. Then they shout.”

“They ought to keep their rifles.”

“They think if they throw away their rifles they can’t make them fight.”

In the dark and the rain, making our way along the side of the road I
could see that many of the troops still had their rifles. They stuck up
above the capes.

“What brigade are you?” an officer called out.

“_Brigata di Pace_,” some one shouted. “Peace Brigade!” The officer said
nothing.

“What does he say? What does the officer say?”

“Down with the officer. _Viva la Pace!_”

“Come on,” Piani said. We passed two British ambulances, abandoned in
the block of vehicles.

“They’re from Gorizia,” Piani said. “I know the cars.”

“They got further than we did.”

“They started earlier.”

“I wonder where the drivers are?”

“Up ahead probably.”

“The Germans have stopped outside Udine,” I said. “These people will all
get across the river.”

“Yes,” Piani said. “That’s why I think the war will go on.”

“The Germans could come on,” I said. “I wonder why they don’t come on.”

“I don’t know. I don’t know anything about this kind of war.”

“They have to wait for their transport I suppose.”

“I don’t know,” Piani said. Alone he was much gentler. When he was with
the others he was a very rough talker.

“Are you married, Luigi?”

“You know I am married.”

“Is that why you did not want to be a prisoner?”

“That is one reason. Are you married, Tenente?”

“No.”

“Neither is Bonello.”

“You can’t tell anything by a man’s being married. But I should think a
married man would want to get back to his wife,” I said. I would be glad
to talk about wives.

“Yes.”

“How are your feet?”

“They’re sore enough.”

Before daylight we reached the bank of the Tagliamento and followed down
along the flooded river to the bridge where all the traffic was
crossing.

“They ought to be able to hold at this river,” Piani said. In the dark
the flood looked high. The water swirled and it was wide. The wooden
bridge was nearly three-quarters of a mile across, and the river, that
usually ran in narrow channels in the wide stony bed far below the
bridge, was close under the wooden planking. We went along the bank and
then worked our way into the crowd that were crossing the bridge.
Crossing slowly in the rain a few feet above the flood, pressed tight in
the crowd, the box of an artillery caisson just ahead, I looked over the
side and watched the river. Now that we could not go our own pace I felt
very tired. There was no exhilaration in crossing the bridge. I wondered
what it would be like if a plane bombed it in the daytime.

“Piani,” I said.

“Here I am, Tenente.” He was a little ahead in the jam. No one was
talking. They were all trying to get across as soon as they could:
thinking only of that. We were almost across. At the far end of the
bridge there were officers and carabinieri standing on both sides
flashing lights. I saw them silhouetted against the sky-line. As we came
close to them I saw one of the officers point to a man in the column. A
carabiniere went in after him and came out holding the man by the arm.
He took him away from the road. We came almost opposite them. The
officers were scrutinizing every one in the column, sometimes speaking
to each other, going forward to flash a light in some one’s face. They
took some one else out just before we came opposite. I saw the man. He
was a lieutenant-colonel. I saw the stars in the box on his sleeve as
they flashed a light on him. His hair was gray and he was short and fat.
The carabiniere pulled him in behind the line of officers. As we came
opposite I saw one or two of them look at me. Then one pointed at me and
spoke to a carabiniere. I saw the carabiniere start for me, come through
the edge of the column toward me, then felt him take me by the collar.

“What’s the matter with you?” I said and hit him in the face. I saw his
face under the hat, upturned mustaches and blood coming down his cheek.
Another one dove in toward us.

“What’s the matter with you?” I said. He did not answer. He was watching
a chance to grab me. I put my arm behind me to loosen my pistol.

“Don’t you know you can’t touch an officer?”

The other one grabbed me from behind and pulled my arm up so that it
twisted in the socket. I turned with him and the other one grabbed me
around the neck. I kicked his shins and got my left knee into his groin.

“Shoot him if he resists,” I heard some one say.

“What’s the meaning of this?” I tried to shout but my voice was not very
loud. They had me at the side of the road now.

“Shoot him if he resists,” an officer said. “Take him over back.”

“Who are you?”

“You’ll find out.”

“Who are you?”

“Battle police,” another officer said.

“Why don’t you ask me to step over instead of having one of these
airplanes grab me?”

They did not answer. They did not have to answer. They were battle
police.

“Take him back there with the others,” the first officer said. “You see.
He speaks Italian with an accent.”

“So do you, you ——,” I said.

“Take him back with the others,” the first officer said. They took me
down behind the line of officers below the road toward a group of people
in a field by the river bank. As we walked toward them shots were fired.
I saw flashes of the rifles and heard the reports. We came up to the
group. There were four officers standing together, with a man in front
of them with a carabiniere on each side of him. A group of men were
standing guarded by carabinieri. Four other carabinieri stood near the
questioning officers, leaning on their carbines. They were wide-hatted
carabinieri. The two who had me shoved me in with the group waiting to
be questioned. I looked at the man the officers were questioning. He was
the fat gray-haired little lieutenant-colonel they had taken out of the
column. The questioners had all the efficiency, coldness and command of
themselves of Italians who are firing and are not being fired on.

“Your brigade?”

He told them.

“Regiment?”

He told them.

“Why are you not with your regiment?”

He told them.

“Do you not know that an officer should be with his troops?”

He did.

That was all. Another officer spoke.

“It is you and such as you that have let the barbarians onto the sacred
soil of the fatherland.”

“I beg your pardon,” said the lieutenant-colonel.

“It is because of treachery such as yours that we have lost the fruits
of victory.”

“Have you ever been in a retreat?” the lieutenant-colonel asked.

“Italy should never retreat.”

We stood there in the rain and listened to this. We were facing the
officers and the prisoner stood in front and a little to one side of us.

“If you are going to shoot me,” the lieutenant-colonel said, “please
shoot me at once without further questioning. The questioning is
stupid.” He made the sign of the cross. The officers spoke together. One
wrote something on a pad of paper.

“Abandoned his troops, ordered to be shot,” he said.

Two carabinieri took the lieutenant-colonel to the river bank. He walked
in the rain, an old man with his hat off, a carabiniere on either side.
I did not watch them shoot him but I heard the shots. They were
questioning some one else. This officer too was separated from his
troops. He was not allowed to make an explanation. He cried when they
read the sentence from the pad of paper, and they were questioning
another when they shot him. They made a point of being intent on
questioning the next man while the man who had been questioned before
was being shot. In this way there was obviously nothing they could do
about it. I did not know whether I should wait to be questioned or make
a break now. I was obviously a German in Italian uniform. I saw how
their minds worked; if they had minds and if they worked. They were all
young men and they were saving their country. The second army was being
re-formed beyond the Tagliamento. They were executing officers of the
rank of major and above who were separated from their troops. They were
also dealing summarily with German agitators in Italian uniform. They
wore steel helmets. Only two of us had steel helmets. Some of the
carabinieri had them. The other carabinieri wore the wide hat. Airplanes
we called them. We stood in the rain and were taken out one at a time to
be questioned and shot. So far they had shot every one they had
questioned. The questioners had that beautiful detachment and devotion
to stern justice of men dealing in death without being in any danger of
it. They were questioning a full colonel of a line regiment. Three more
officers had just been put in with us.

“Where was his regiment?”

I looked at the carabinieri. They were looking at the newcomers. The
others were looking at the colonel. I ducked down, pushed between two
men, and ran for the river, my head down. I tripped at the edge and went
in with a splash. The water was very cold and I stayed under as long as
I could. I could feel the current swirl me and I stayed under until I
thought I could never come up. The minute I came up I took a breath and
went down again. It was easy to stay under with so much clothing and my
boots. When I came up the second time I saw a piece of timber ahead of
me and reached it and held on with one hand. I kept my head behind it
and did not even look over it. I did not want to see the bank. There
were shots when I ran and shots when I came up the first time. I heard
them when I was almost above water. There were no shots now. The piece
of timber swung in the current and I held it with one hand. I looked at
the bank. It seemed to be going by very fast. There was much wood in the
stream. The water was very cold. We passed the brush of an island above
the water. I held onto the timber with both hands and let it take me
along. The shore was out of sight now.




                              CHAPTER XXXI

You do not know how long you are in a river when the current moves
swiftly. It seems a long time and it may be very short. The water was
cold and in flood and many things passed that had been floated off the
banks when the river rose. I was lucky to have a heavy timber to hold on
to, and I lay in the icy water with my chin on the wood, holding as
easily as I could with both hands. I was afraid of cramps and I hoped we
would move toward the shore. We went down the river in a long curve. It
was beginning to be light enough so I could see the bushes along the
shore-line. There was a brush island ahead and the current moved toward
the shore. I wondered if I should take off my boots and clothes and try
to swim ashore, but decided not to. I had never thought of anything but
that I would reach the shore some way, and I would be in a bad position
if I landed barefoot. I had to get to Mestre some way.

I watched the shore come close, then swing away, then come closer again.
We were floating more slowly. The shore was very close now. I could see
twigs on the willow bush. The timber swung slowly so that the bank was
behind me and I knew we were in an eddy. We went slowly around. As I saw
the bank again, very close now, I tried holding with one arm and kicking
and swimming the timber toward the bank with the other, but I did not
bring it any closer. I was afraid we would move out of the eddy and,
holding with one hand, I drew up my feet so they were against the side
of the timber and shoved hard toward the bank. I could see the brush,
but even with my momentum and swimming as hard as I could, the current
was taking me away. I thought then I would drown because of my boots,
but I thrashed and fought through the water, and when I looked up the
bank was coming toward me, and I kept thrashing and swimming in a
heavy-footed panic until I reached it. I hung to the willow branch and
did not have strength to pull myself up but I knew I would not drown
now. It had never occurred to me on the timber that I might drown. I
felt hollow and sick in my stomach and chest from the effort, and I held
to the branches and waited. When the sick feeling was gone I pulled into
the willow bushes and rested again, my arms around some brush, holding
tight with my hands to the branches. Then I crawled out, pushed on
through the willows and onto the bank. It was half-daylight and I saw no
one. I lay flat on the bank and heard the river and the rain.

After a while I got up and started along the bank. I knew there was no
bridge across the river until Latisana. I thought I might be opposite
San Vito. I began to think out what I should do. Ahead there was a ditch
running into the river. I went toward it. So far I had seen no one and I
sat down by some bushes along the bank of the ditch and took off my
shoes and emptied them of water. I took off my coat, took my wallet with
my papers and my money all wet in it out of the inside pocket and then
wrung the coat out. I took off my trousers and wrung them too, then my
shirt and underclothing. I slapped and rubbed myself and then dressed
again. I had lost my cap.

Before I put on my coat I cut the cloth stars off my sleeves and put
them in the inside pocket with my money. My money was wet but was all
right. I counted it. There were three thousand and some lire. My clothes
felt wet and clammy and I slapped my arms to keep the circulation going.
I had woven underwear and I did not think I would catch cold if I kept
moving. They had taken my pistol at the road and I put the holster under
my coat. I had no cape and it was cold in the rain. I started up the
bank of the canal. It was daylight and the country was wet, low and
dismal looking. The fields were bare and wet; a long way away I could
see a campanile rising out of the plain. I came up onto a road. Ahead I
saw some troops coming down the road. I limped along the side of the
road and they passed me and paid no attention to me. They were a
machine-gun detachment going up toward the river. I went on down the
road.

That day I crossed the Venetian plain. It is a low level country and
under the rain it is even flatter. Toward the sea there are salt marshes
and very few roads. The roads all go along the river mouths to the sea
and to cross the country you must go along the paths beside the canals.
I was working across the country from the north to the south and had
crossed two railway lines and many roads and finally I came out at the
end of a path onto a railway line where it ran beside a marsh. It was
the main line from Venice to Trieste, with a high solid embankment, a
solid roadbed and double track. Down the tracks a way was a flag-station
and I could see soldiers on guard. Up the line there was a bridge over a
stream that flowed into the marsh. I could see a guard too at the
bridge. Crossing the fields to the north I had seen a train pass on this
railroad, visible a long way across the flat plain, and I thought a
train might come from Portogruaro. I watched the guards and lay down on
the embankment so that I could see both ways along the track. The guard
at the bridge walked a way up the line toward where I lay, then turned
and went back toward the bridge. I lay, and was hungry, and waited for
the train. The one I had seen was so long that the engine moved it very
slowly and I was sure I could get aboard it. After I had almost given up
hoping for one I saw a train coming. The engine, coming straight on,
grew larger slowly. I looked at the guard at the bridge. He was walking
on the near side of the bridge but on the other side of the tracks. That
would put him out of sight when the train passed. I watched the engine
come nearer. It was working hard. I could see there were many cars. I
knew there would be guards on the train, and I tried to see where they
were, but, keeping out of sight, I could not. The engine was almost to
where I was lying. When it came opposite, working and puffing even on
the level, and I saw the engineer pass, I stood up and stepped up close
to the passing cars. If the guards were watching I was a less suspicious
object standing beside the track. Several closed freight-cars passed.
Then I saw a low open car of the sort they call gondolas coming, covered
with canvas. I stood until it had almost passed, then jumped and caught
the rear hand-rods and pulled up. I crawled down between the gondola and
the shelter of the high freight-car behind. I did not think any one had
seen me. I was holding to the hand-rods and crouching low, my feet on
the coupling. We were almost opposite the bridge. I remembered the
guard. As we passed him he looked at me. He was a boy and his helmet was
too big for him. I stared at him contemptuously and he looked away. He
thought I had something to do with the train.

We were past. I saw him still looking uncomfortable, watching the other
cars pass and I stooped to see how the canvas was fastened. It had
grummets and was laced down at the edge with cord. I took out my knife,
cut the cord and put my arm under. There were hard bulges under the
canvas that tightened in the rain. I looked up and ahead. There was a
guard on the freight-car ahead but he was looking forward. I let go of
the hand-rails and ducked under the canvas. My forehead hit something
that gave me a violent bump and I felt blood on my face but I crawled on
in and lay flat. Then I turned around and fastened down the canvas.

I was in under the canvas with guns. They smelled cleanly of oil and
grease. I lay and listened to the rain on the canvas and the clicking of
the car over the rails. There was a little light came through and I lay
and looked at the guns. They had their canvas jackets on. I thought they
must have been sent ahead from the third army. The bump on my forehead
was swollen and I stopped the bleeding by lying still and letting it
coagulate, then picked away the dried blood except over the cut. It was
nothing. I had no handkerchief, but feeling with my fingers I washed
away where the dried blood had been, with rain-water that dripped from
the canvas, and wiped it clean with the sleeve of my coat. I did not
want to look conspicuous. I knew I would have to get out before they got
to Mestre because they would be taking care of these guns. They had no
guns to lose or forget about. I was terrifically hungry.




                             CHAPTER XXXII

Lying on the floor of the flat-car with the guns beside me under the
canvas I was wet, cold and very hungry. Finally I rolled over and lay
flat on my stomach with my head on my arms. My knee was stiff, but it
had been very satisfactory. Valentini had done a fine job. I had done
half the retreat on foot and swum part of the Tagliamento with his knee.
It was his knee all right. The other knee was mine. Doctors did things
to you and then it was not your body any more. The head was mine, and
the inside of the belly. It was very hungry in there. I could feel it
turn over on itself. The head was mine, but not to use, not to think
with; only to remember and not too much remember.

I could remember Catherine but I knew I would get crazy if I thought
about her when I was not sure yet I would see her, so I would not think
about her, only about her a little, only about her with the car going
slowly and clickingly, and some light through the canvas and my lying
with Catherine on the floor of the car. Hard as the floor of the car to
lie not thinking only feeling, having been away too long, the clothes
wet and the floor moving only a little each time and lonesome inside and
alone with wet clothing and hard floor for a wife.

You did not love the floor of a flat-car nor guns with canvas jackets
and the smell of vaselined metal or a canvas that rain leaked through,
although it is very fine under a canvas and pleasant with guns; but you
loved some one else whom now you knew was not even to be pretended
there; you seeing now very clearly and coldly—not so coldly as clearly
and emptily. You saw emptily, lying on your stomach, having been present
when one army moved back and another came forward. You had lost your
cars and your men as a floorwalker loses the stock of his department in
a fire. There was, however, no insurance. You were out of it now. You
had no more obligation. If they shot floorwalkers after a fire in the
department store because they spoke with an accent they had always had,
then certainly the floorwalkers would not be expected to return when the
store opened again for business. They might seek other employment; if
there was any other employment and the police did not get them.

Anger was washed away in the river along with any obligation. Although
that ceased when the carabiniere put his hands on my collar. I would
like to have had the uniform off although I did not care much about the
outward forms. I had taken off the stars, but that was for convenience.
It was no point of honor. I was not against them. I was through. I
wished them all the luck. There were the good ones, and the brave ones,
and the calm ones and the sensible ones, and they deserved it. But it
was not my show any more and I wished this bloody train would get to
Mestre and I would eat and stop thinking. I would have to stop.

Piani would tell them they had shot me. They went through the pockets
and took the papers of the people they shot. They would not have my
papers. They might call me drowned. I wondered what they would hear in
the States. Dead from wounds and other causes. Good Christ I was hungry.
I wondered what had become of the priest at the mess. And Rinaldi. He
was probably at Pordenone. If they had not gone further back. Well, I
would never see him now. I would never see any of them now. That life
was over. I did not think he had syphilis. It was not a serious disease
anyway if you took it in time, they said. But he would worry. I would
worry too if I had it. Any one would worry.

I was not made to think. I was made to eat. My God, yes. Eat and drink
and sleep with Catherine. To-night maybe. No that was impossible. But
to-morrow night, and a good meal and sheets and never going away again
except together. Probably have to go damned quickly. She would go. I
knew she would go. When would we go? That was something to think about.
It was getting dark. I lay and thought where we would go. There were
many places.




                                BOOK IV




                             CHAPTER XXXIII

I dropped off the train in Milan as it slowed to come into the station
early in the morning before it was light. I crossed the track and came
out between some buildings and down onto the street. A wine shop was
open and I went in for some coffee. It smelled of early morning, of
swept dust, spoons in coffee-glasses and the wet circles left by
wine-glasses. The proprietor was behind the bar. Two soldiers sat at a
table. I stood at the bar and drank a glass of coffee and ate a piece of
bread. The coffee was gray with milk, and I skimmed the milk scum off
the top with a piece of bread. The proprietor looked at me.

“You want a glass of grappa?”

“No thanks.”

“On me,” he said and poured a small glass and pushed it toward me.
“What’s happening at the front?”

“I would not know.”

“They are drunk,” he said, moving his hand toward the two soldiers. I
could believe him. They looked drunk.

“Tell me,” he said, “what is happening at the front?”

“I would not know about the front.”

“I saw you come down the wall. You came off the train.”

“There is a big retreat.”

“I read the papers. What happens? Is it over?”

“I don’t think so.”

He filled the glass with grappa from a short bottle. “If you are in
trouble,” he said, “I can keep you.”

“I am not in trouble.”

“If you are in trouble stay here with me.”

“Where does one stay?”

“In the building. Many stay here. Any who are in trouble stay here.”

“Are many in trouble?”

“It depends on the trouble. You are a South American?”

“No.”

“Speak Spanish?”

“A little.”

He wiped off the bar.

“It is hard now to leave the country but in no way impossible.”

“I have no wish to leave.”

“You can stay here as long as you want. You will see what sort of man I
am.”

“I have to go this morning but I will remember the address to return.”

He shook his head. “You won’t come back if you talk like that. I thought
you were in real trouble.”

“I am in no trouble. But I value the address of a friend.”

I put a ten-lira note on the bar to pay for the coffee.

“Have a grappa with me,” I said.

“It is not necessary.”

“Have one.”

He poured the two glasses.

“Remember,” he said. “Come here. Do not let other people take you in.
Here you are all right.”

“I am sure.”

“You are sure?”

“Yes.”

He was serious. “Then let me tell you one thing. Do not go about with
that coat.”

“Why?”

“On the sleeves it shows very plainly where the stars have been cut
away. The cloth is a different color.”

I did not say anything.

“If you have no papers I can give you papers.”

“What papers?”

“Leave-papers.”

“I have no need for papers. I have papers.”

“All right,” he said. “But if you need papers I can get what you wish.”

“How much are such papers?”

“It depends on what they are. The price is reasonable.”

“I don’t need any now.”

He shrugged his shoulders.

“I’m all right,” I said.

When I went out he said, “Don’t forget that I am your friend.”

“No.”

“I will see you again,” he said.

“Good,” I said.

Outside I kept away from the station, where there were military police,
and picked up a cab at the edge of the little park. I gave the driver
the address of the hospital. At the hospital I went to the porter’s
lodge. His wife embraced me. He shook my hand.

“You are back. You are safe.”

“Yes.”

“Have you had breakfast?”

“Yes.”

“How are you, Tenente? How are you?” the wife asked.

“Fine.”

“Won’t you have breakfast with us?”

“No, thank you. Tell me is Miss Barkley here at the hospital now?”

“Miss Barkley?”

“The English lady nurse.”

“His girl,” the wife said. She patted my arm and smiled.

“No,” the porter said. “She is away.”

My heart went down. “You are sure? I mean the tall blonde English young
lady.”

“I am sure. She is gone to Stresa.”

“When did she go?”

“She went two days ago with the other lady English.”

“Good,” I said. “I wish you to do something for me. Do not tell any one
you have seen me. It is very important.”

“I won’t tell any one,” the porter said. I gave him a ten-lira note. He
pushed it away.

“I promise you I will tell no one,” he said. “I don’t want any money.”

“What can we do for you, Signor Tenente?” his wife asked.

“Only that,” I said.

“We are dumb,” the porter said. “You will let me know anything I can
do?”

“Yes,” I said. “Good-by. I will see you again.”

They stood in the door, looking after me.

I got into the cab and gave the driver the address of Simmons, one of
the men I knew who was studying singing.

Simmons lived a long way out in the town toward the Porta Magenta. He
was still in bed and sleepy when I went to see him.

“You get up awfully early, Henry,” he said.

“I came in on the early train.”

“What’s all this retreat? Were you at the front? Will you have a
cigarette? They’re in that box on the table.” It was a big room with a
bed beside the wall, a piano over on the far side and a dresser and
table. I sat on a chair by the bed. Simmons sat propped up by the
pillows and smoked.

“I’m in a jam, Sim,” I said.

“So am I,” he said. “I’m always in a jam. Won’t you smoke?”

“No,” I said. “What’s the procedure in going to Switzerland?”

“For you? The Italians wouldn’t let you out of the country.”

“Yes. I know that. But the Swiss. What will they do?”

“They intern you.”

“I know. But what’s the mechanics of it?”

“Nothing. It’s very simple. You can go anywhere. I think you just have
to report or something. Why? Are you fleeing the police?”

“Nothing definite yet.”

“Don’t tell me if you don’t want. But it would be interesting to hear.
Nothing happens here. I was a great flop at Piacenza.”

“I’m awfully sorry.”

“Oh yes—I went very badly. I sung well too. I’m going to try it again
at the Lyrico here.”

“I’d like to be there.”

“You’re awfully polite. You aren’t in a bad mess, are you?”

“I don’t know.”

“Don’t tell me if you don’t want. How do you happen to be away from the
bloody front?”

“I think I’m through with it.”

“Good boy. I always knew you had sense. Can I help you any way?”

“You’re awfully busy.”

“Not a bit of it, my dear Henry. Not a bit of it. I’d be happy to do
anything.”

“You’re about my size. Would you go out and buy me an outfit of civilian
clothes? I’ve clothes but they’re all at Rome.”

“You did live there, didn’t you? It’s a filthy place. How did you ever
live there?”

“I wanted to be an architect.”

“That’s no place for that. Don’t buy clothes. I’ll give you all the
clothes you want. I’ll fit you out so you’ll be a great success. Go in
that dressing room. There’s a closet. Take anything you want. My dear
fellow, you don’t want to buy clothes.”

“I’d rather buy them, Sim.”

“My dear fellow, it’s easier for me to let you have them than go out and
buy them. Have you got a passport? You won’t get far without a
passport.”

“Yes. I’ve still got my passport.”

“Then get dressed, my dear fellow, and off to old Helvetia.”

“It’s not that simple. I have to go up to Stresa first.”

“Ideal, my dear fellow. You just row a boat across. If I wasn’t trying
to sing, I’d go with you. I’ll go yet.”

“You could take up yodelling.”

“My dear fellow, I’ll take up yodelling yet. I really can sing though.
That’s the strange part.”

“I’ll bet you can sing.”

He lay back in bed smoking a cigarette.

“Don’t bet too much. But I can sing though. It’s damned funny, but I
can. I like to sing. Listen.” He roared into “Africana,” his neck
swelling, the veins standing out. “I can sing,” he said. “Whether they
like it or not.” I looked out of the window. “I’ll go down and let my
cab go.”

“Come back up, my dear fellow, and we’ll have breakfast.” He stepped out
of bed, stood straight, took a deep breath and commenced doing bending
exercises. I went downstairs and paid off the cab.




                             CHAPTER XXXIV

In civilian clothes I felt a masquerader. I had been in uniform a long
time and I missed the feeling of being held by your clothes. The
trousers felt very floppy. I had bought a ticket at Milan for Stresa. I
had also bought a new hat. I could not wear Sim’s hat but his clothes
were fine. They smelled of tobacco and as I sat in the compartment and
looked out the window the new hat felt very new and the clothes very
old. I myself felt as sad as the wet Lombard country that was outside
through the window. There were some aviators in the compartment who did
not think much of me. They avoided looking at me and were very scornful
of a civilian my age. I did not feel insulted. In the old days I would
have insulted them and picked a fight. They got off at Gallarate and I
was glad to be alone. I had the paper but I did not read it because I
did not want to read about the war. I was going to forget the war. I had
made a separate peace. I felt damned lonely and was glad when the train
got to Stresa.

At the station I had expected to see the porters from the hotels but
there was no one. The season had been over a long time and no one met
the train. I got down from the train with my bag, it was Sim’s bag, and
very light to carry, being empty except for two shirts, and stood under
the roof of the station in the rain while the train went on. I found a
man in the station and asked him if he knew what hotels were open. The
Grand-Hôtel & des Isles Borromées was open and several small hotels that
stayed open all the year. I started in the rain for the Isles Borromées
carrying my bag. I saw a carriage coming down the street and signalled
to the driver. It was better to arrive in a carriage. We drove up to the
carriage entrance of the big hotel and the concierge came out with an
umbrella and was very polite.

I took a good room. It was very big and light and looked out on the
lake. The clouds were down over the lake but it would be beautiful with
the sunlight. I was expecting my wife, I said. There was a big double
bed, a _letto matrimoniale_ with a satin coverlet. The hotel was very
luxurious. I went down the long halls, down the wide stairs, through the
rooms to the bar. I knew the barman and sat on a high stool and ate
salted almonds and potato chips. The martini felt cool and clean.

“What are you doing here in _borghese_?” the barman asked after he had
mixed a second martini.

“I am on leave. Convalescing-leave.”

“There is no one here. I don’t know why they keep the hotel open.”

“Have you been fishing?”

“I’ve caught some beautiful pieces. Trolling this time of year you catch
some beautiful pieces.”

“Did you ever get the tobacco I sent?”

“Yes. Didn’t you get my card?”

I laughed. I had not been able to get the tobacco. It was American
pipe-tobacco that he wanted, but my relatives had stopped sending it or
it was being held up. Anyway it never came.

“I’ll get some somewhere,” I said. “Tell me have you seen two English
girls in the town? They came here day before yesterday.”

“They are not at the hotel.”

“They are nurses.”

“I have seen two nurses. Wait a minute, I will find out where they are.”

“One of them is my wife,” I said. “I have come here to meet her.”

“The other is my wife.”

“I am not joking.”

“Pardon my stupid joke,” he said. “I did not understand.” He went away
and was gone quite a little while. I ate olives, salted almonds and
potato chips and looked at myself in civilian clothes in the mirror
behind the bar. The bartender came back. “They are at the little hotel
near the station,” he said.

“How about some sandwiches?”

“I’ll ring for some. You understand there is nothing here, now there are
no people.”

“Isn’t there really any one at all?”

“Yes. There are a few people.”

The sandwiches came and I ate three and drank a couple more martinis. I
had never tasted anything so cool and clean. They made me feel
civilized. I had had too much red wine, bread, cheese, bad coffee and
grappa. I sat on the high stool before the pleasant mahogany, the brass
and the mirrors and did not think at all. The barman asked me some
question.

“Don’t talk about the war,” I said. The war was a long way away. Maybe
there wasn’t any war. There was no war here. Then I realized it was over
for me. But I did not have the feeling that it was really over. I had
the feeling of a boy who thinks of what is happening at a certain hour
at the schoolhouse from which he has played truant.



Catherine and Helen Ferguson were at supper when I came to their hotel.
Standing in the hallway I saw them at table. Catherine’s face was away
from me and I saw the line of her hair and her cheek and her lovely neck
and shoulders. Ferguson was talking. She stopped when I came in.

“My God,” she said.

“Hello,” I said.

“Why it’s you!” Catherine said. Her face lighted up. She looked too
happy to believe it. I kissed her. Catherine blushed and I sat down at
the table.

“You’re a fine mess,” Ferguson said. “What are you doing here? Have you
eaten?”

“No.” The girl who was serving the meal came in and I told her to bring
a plate for me. Catherine looked at me all the time, her eyes happy.

“What are you doing in mufti?” Ferguson asked.

“I’m in the Cabinet.”

“You’re in some mess.”

“Cheer up, Fergy. Cheer up just a little.”

“I’m not cheered by seeing you. I know the mess you’ve gotten this girl
into. You’re no cheerful sight to me.”

Catherine smiled at me and touched me with her foot under the table.

“No one got me in a mess, Fergy. I get in my own messes.”

“I can’t stand him,” Ferguson said. “He’s done nothing but ruin you with
his sneaking Italian tricks. Americans are worse than Italians.”

“The Scotch are such a moral people,” Catherine said.

“I don’t mean that. I mean his Italian sneakiness.”

“Am I sneaky, Fergy?”

“You are. You’re worse than sneaky. You’re like a snake. A snake with an
Italian uniform: with a cape around your neck.”

“I haven’t got an Italian uniform now.”

“That’s just another example of your sneakiness. You had a love affair
all summer and got this girl with child and now I suppose you’ll sneak
off.”

I smiled at Catherine and she smiled at me.

“We’ll both sneak off,” she said.

“You’re two of the same thing,” Ferguson said. “I’m ashamed of you,
Catherine Barkley. You have no shame and no honor and you’re as sneaky
as he is.”

“Don’t, Fergy,” Catherine said and patted her hand. “Don’t denounce me.
You know we like each other.”

“Take your hand away,” Ferguson said. Her face was red. “If you had any
shame it would be different. But you’re God knows how many months gone
with child and you think it’s a joke and are all smiles because your
seducer’s come back. You’ve no shame and no feelings.” She began to cry.
Catherine went over and put her arm around her. As she stood comforting
Ferguson, I could see no change in her figure.

“I don’t care,” Ferguson sobbed. “I think it’s dreadful.”

“There, there, Fergy,” Catherine comforted her. “I’ll be ashamed. Don’t
cry, Fergy. Don’t cry, old Fergy.”

“I’m not crying,” Ferguson sobbed. “I’m not crying. Except for the awful
thing you’ve gotten into.” She looked at me. “I hate you,” she said.
“She can’t make me not hate you. You dirty sneaking American Italian.”
Her eyes and nose were red with crying.

Catherine smiled at me.

“Don’t you smile at him with your arm around me.”

“You’re unreasonable, Fergy.”

“I know it,” Ferguson sobbed. “You mustn’t mind me, either of you. I’m
so upset. I’m not reasonable. I know it. I want you both to be happy.”

“We’re happy,” Catherine said. “You’re a sweet Fergy.”

Ferguson cried again. “I don’t want you happy the way you are. Why don’t
you get married? You haven’t got another wife have you?”

“No,” I said. Catherine laughed.

“It’s nothing to laugh about,” Ferguson said. “Plenty of them have other
wives.”

“We’ll be married, Fergy,” Catherine said, “if it will please you.”

“Not to please me. You should want to be married.”

“We’ve been very busy.”

“Yes. I know. Busy making babies.” I thought she was going to cry again
but she went into bitterness instead. “I suppose you’ll go off with him
now to-night?”

“Yes,” said Catherine. “If he wants me.”

“What about me?”

“Are you afraid to stay here alone?”

“Yes, I am.”

“Then I’ll stay with you.”

“No, go on with him. Go with him right away. I’m sick of seeing both of
you.”

“We’d better finish dinner.”

“No. Go right away.”

“Fergy, be reasonable.”

“I say get out right away. Go away both of you.”

“Let’s go then,” I said. I was sick of Fergy.

“You do want to go. You see you want to leave me even to eat dinner
alone. I’ve always wanted to go to the Italian lakes and this is how it
is. Oh, Oh,” she sobbed, then looked at Catherine and choked.

“We’ll stay till after dinner,” Catherine said. “And I’ll not leave you
alone if you want me to stay. I won’t leave you alone, Fergy.”

“No. No. I want you to go. I want you to go.” She wiped her eyes. “I’m
so unreasonable. Please don’t mind me.”

The girl who served the meal had been upset by all the crying. Now as
she brought in the next course she seemed relieved that things were
better.



That night at the hotel, in our room with the long empty hall outside
and our shoes outside the door, a thick carpet on the floor of the room,
outside the windows the rain falling and in the room light and pleasant
and cheerful, then the light out and it exciting with smooth sheets and
the bed comfortable, feeling that we had come home, feeling no longer
alone, waking in the night to find the other one there, and not gone
away; all other things were unreal. We slept when we were tired and if
we woke the other one woke too so one was not alone. Often a man wishes
to be alone and a girl wishes to be alone too and if they love each
other they are jealous of that in each other, but I can truly say we
never felt that. We could feel alone when we were together, alone
against the others. It has only happened to me like that once. I have
been alone while I was with many girls and that is the way that you can
be most lonely. But we were never lonely and never afraid when we were
together. I know that the night is not the same as the day: that all
things are different, that the things of the night cannot be explained
in the day, because they do not then exist, and the night can be a
dreadful time for lonely people once their loneliness has started. But
with Catherine there was almost no difference in the night except that
it was an even better time. If people bring so much courage to this
world the world has to kill them to break them, so of course it kills
them. The world breaks every one and afterward many are strong at the
broken places. But those that will not break it kills. It kills the very
good and the very gentle and the very brave impartially. If you are none
of these you can be sure it will kill you too but there will be no
special hurry.



I remember waking in the morning. Catherine was asleep and the sunlight
was coming in through the window. The rain had stopped and I stepped out
of bed and across the floor to the window. Down below were the gardens,
bare now but beautifully regular, the gravel paths, the trees, the stone
wall by the lake and the lake in the sunlight with the mountains beyond.
I stood at the window looking out and when I turned away I saw Catherine
was awake and watching me.

“How are you, darling?” she said. “Isn’t it a lovely day?”

“How do you feel?”

“I feel very well. We had a lovely night.”

“Do you want breakfast?”

She wanted breakfast. So did I and we had it in bed, the November
sunlight coming in the window, and the breakfast tray across my lap.

“Don’t you want the paper? You always wanted the paper in the hospital.”

“No,” I said. “I don’t want the paper now.”

“Was it so bad you don’t want even to read about it?”

“I don’t want to read about it.”

“I wish I had been with you so I would know about it too.”

“I’ll tell you about it if I ever get it straight in my head.”

“But won’t they arrest you if they catch you out of uniform?”

“They’ll probably shoot me.”

“Then we’ll not stay here. We’ll get out of the country.”

“I’d thought something of that.”

“We’ll get out. Darling, you shouldn’t take silly chances. Tell me how
did you come from Mestre to Milan?”

“I came on the train. I was in uniform then.”

“Weren’t you in danger then?”

“Not much. I had an old order of movement. I fixed the dates on it in
Mestre.”

“Darling, you’re liable to be arrested here any time. I won’t have it.
It’s silly to do something like that. Where would we be if they took you
off?”

“Let’s not think about it. I’m tired of thinking about it.”

“What would you do if they came to arrest you?”

“Shoot them.”

“You see how silly you are, I won’t let you go out of the hotel until we
leave here.”

“Where are we going to go?”

“Please don’t be that way, darling. We’ll go wherever you say. But
please find some place to go right away.”

“Switzerland is down the lake, we can go there.”

“That will be lovely.”

It was clouding over outside and the lake was darkening.

“I wish we did not always have to live like criminals,” I said.

“Darling, don’t be that way. You haven’t lived like a criminal very
long. And we never live like criminals. We’re going to have a fine
time.”

“I feel like a criminal. I’ve deserted from the army.”

“Darling, _please_ be sensible. It’s not deserting from the army. It’s
only the Italian army.”

I laughed. “You’re a fine girl. Let’s get back into bed. I feel fine in
bed.”



A little while later Catherine said, “You don’t feel like a criminal do
you?”

“No,” I said. “Not when I’m with you.”

“You’re such a silly boy,” she said. “But I’ll look after you. Isn’t it
splendid, darling, that I don’t have any morning-sickness?”

“It’s grand.”

“You don’t appreciate what a fine wife you have. But I don’t care. I’ll
get you some place where they can’t arrest you and then we’ll have a
lovely time.”

“Let’s go there right away.”

“We will, darling. I’ll go any place any time you wish.”

“Let’s not think about anything.”

“All right.”




                              CHAPTER XXXV

Catherine went along the lake to the little hotel to see Ferguson and I
sat in the bar and read the papers. There were comfortable leather
chairs in the bar and I sat in one of them and read until the barman
came in. The army had not stood at the Tagliamento. They were falling
back to the Piave. I remembered the Piave. The railroad crossed it near
San Dona going up to the front. It was deep and slow there and quite
narrow. Down below there were mosquito marshes and canals. There were
some lovely villas. Once, before the war, going up to Cortina D’Ampezzo
I had gone along it for several hours in the hills. Up there it looked
like a trout stream, flowing swiftly with shallow stretches and pools
under the shadow of the rocks. The road turned off from it at Cadore. I
wondered how the army that was up there would come down. The barman came
in.

“Count Greffi was asking for you,” he said.

“Who?”

“Count Greffi. You remember the old man who was here when you were here
before.”

“Is he here?”

“Yes, he’s here with his niece. I told him you were here. He wants you
to play billiards.”

“Where is he?”

“He’s taking a walk.”

“How is he?”

“He’s younger than ever. He drank three champagne cocktails last night
before dinner.”

“How’s his billiard game?”

“Good. He beat me. When I told him you were here he was very pleased.
There’s nobody here for him to play with.”

Count Greffi was ninety-four years old. He had been a contemporary of
Metternich and was an old man with white hair and mustache and beautiful
manners. He had been in the diplomatic service of both Austria and Italy
and his birthday parties were the great social event of Milan. He was
living to be one hundred years old and played a smoothly fluent game of
billiards that contrasted with his own ninety-four-year-old brittleness.
I had met him when I had been at Stresa once before out of season and
while we played billiards we drank champagne. I thought it was a
splendid custom and he gave me fifteen points in a hundred and beat me.

“Why didn’t you tell me he was here?”

“I forgot it.”

“Who else is here?”

“No one you know. There are only six people altogether.”

“What are you doing now?”

“Nothing.”

“Come on out fishing.”

“I could come for an hour.”

“Come on. Bring the trolling line.”

The barman put on a coat and we went out. We went down and got a boat
and I rowed while the barman sat in the stern and let out the line with
a spinner and a heavy sinker on the end to troll for lake trout. We
rowed along the shore, the barman holding the line in his hand and
giving it occasional jerks forward. Stresa looked very deserted from the
lake. There were the long rows of bare trees, the big hotels and the
closed villas. I rowed across to Isola Bella and went close to the
walls, where the water deepened sharply, and you saw the rock wall
slanting down in the clear water, and then up and along to the
fisherman’s island. The sun was under a cloud and the water was dark and
smooth and very cold. We did not have a strike though we saw some
circles on the water from rising fish.

I rowed up opposite the fisherman’s island where there were boats drawn
up and men were mending nets.

“Should we get a drink?”

“All right.”

I brought the boat up to the stone pier and the barman pulled in the
line, coiling it on the bottom of the boat and hooking the spinner on
the edge of the gunwale. I stepped out and tied the boat. We went into a
little café, sat at a bare wooden table and ordered vermouth.

“Are you tired from rowing?”

“No.”

“I’ll row back,” he said.

“I like to row.”

“Maybe if you hold the line it will change the luck.”

“All right.”

“Tell me how goes the war.”

“Rotten.”

“I don’t have to go. I’m too old, like Count Greffi.”

“Maybe you’ll have to go yet.”

“Next year they’ll call my class. But I won’t go.”

“What will you do?”

“Get out of the country. I wouldn’t go to war. I was at the war once in
Abyssinia. Nix. Why do you go?”

“I don’t know. I was a fool.”

“Have another vermouth?”

“All right.”

The barman rowed back. We trolled up the lake beyond Stresa and then
down not far from shore. I held the taut line and felt the faint pulsing
of the spinner revolving while I looked at the dark November water of
the lake and the deserted shore. The barman rowed with long strokes and
on the forward thrust of the boat the line throbbed. Once I had a
strike: the line hardened suddenly and jerked back, I pulled and felt
the live weight of the trout and then the line throbbed again. I had
missed him.

“Did he feel big?”

“Pretty big.”

“Once when I was out trolling alone I had the line in my teeth and one
struck and nearly took my mouth out.”

“The best way is to have it over your leg,” I said. “Then you feel it
and don’t lose your teeth.”

I put my hand in the water. It was very cold. We were almost opposite
the hotel now.

“I have to go in,” the barman said, “to be there for eleven o’clock.
_L’heure du cocktail._”

“All right.”

I pulled in the line and wrapped it on a stick notched at each end. The
barman put the boat in a little slip in the stone wall and locked it
with a chain and padlock.

“Any time you want it,” he said, “I’ll give you the key.”

“Thanks.”

We went up to the hotel and in to the bar. I did not want another drink
so early in the morning so I went up to our room. The maid had just
finished doing the room and Catherine was not back yet. I lay down on
the bed and tried to keep from thinking.

When Catherine came back it was all right again. Ferguson was
downstairs, she said. She was coming to lunch.

“I knew you wouldn’t mind,” Catherine said.

“No,” I said.

“What’s the matter, darling?”

“I don’t know.”

“I know. You haven’t anything to do. All you have is me and I go away.”

“That’s true.”

“I’m sorry, darling. I know it must be a dreadful feeling to have
nothing at all suddenly.”

“My life used to be full of everything,” I said. “Now if you aren’t with
me I haven’t a thing in the world.”

“But I’ll be with you. I was only gone for two hours. Isn’t there
anything you can do?”

“I went fishing with the barman.”

“Wasn’t it fun?”

“Yes.”

“Don’t think about me when I’m not here.”

“That’s the way I worked it at the front. But there was something to do
then.”

“Othello with his occupation gone,” she teased.

“Othello was a nigger,” I said. “Besides, I’m not jealous. I’m just so
in love with you that there isn’t anything else.”

“Will you be a good boy and be nice to Ferguson?”

“I’m always nice to Ferguson unless she curses me.”

“Be nice to her. Think how much we have and she hasn’t anything.”

“I don’t think she wants what we have.”

“You don’t know much, darling, for such a wise boy.”

“I’ll be nice to her.”

“I know you will. You’re so sweet.”

“She won’t stay afterward, will she?”

“No. I’ll get rid of her.”

“And then we’ll come up here.”

“Of course. What do you think I want to do?”

We went downstairs to have lunch with Ferguson. She was very impressed
by the hotel and the splendor of the dining-room. We had a good lunch
with a couple of bottles of white capri. Count Greffi came into the
dining-room and bowed to us. His niece, who looked a little like my
grandmother, was with him. I told Catherine and Ferguson about him and
Ferguson was very impressed. The hotel was very big and grand and empty
but the food was good, the wine was very pleasant and finally the wine
made us all feel very well. Catherine had no need to feel any better.
She was very happy. Ferguson became quite cheerful. I felt very well
myself. After lunch Ferguson went back to her hotel. She was going to
lie down for a while after lunch she said.

Along late in the afternoon some one knocked on our door.

“Who is it?”

“The Count Greffi wishes to know if you will play billiards with him.”

I looked at my watch; I had taken it off and it was under the pillow.

“Do you have to go, darling?” Catherine whispered.

“I think I’d better.” The watch was a quarter-past four o’clock. Out
loud I said, “Tell the Count Greffi I will be in the billiard-room at
five o’clock.”

At a quarter to five I kissed Catherine good-by and went into the
bathroom to dress. Knotting my tie and looking in the glass I looked
strange to myself in the civilian clothes. I must remember to buy some
more shirts and socks.

“Will you be away a long time?” Catherine asked. She looked lovely in
the bed. “Would you hand me the brush?”

I watched her brushing her hair, holding her head so the weight of her
hair all came on one side. It was dark outside and the light over the
head of the bed shone on her hair and on her neck and shoulders. I went
over and kissed her and held her hand with the brush and her head sunk
back on the pillow. I kissed her neck and shoulders. I felt faint with
loving her so much.

“I don’t want to go away.”

“I don’t want you to go away.”

“I won’t go then.”

“Yes. Go. It’s only for a little while and then you’ll come back.”

“We’ll have dinner up here.”

“Hurry and come back.”

I found the Count Greffi in the billiard-room. He was practising
strokes, looking very fragile under the light that came down above the
billiard table. On a card table a little way beyond the light was a
silver icing-bucket with the necks and corks of two champagne bottles
showing above the ice. The Count Greffi straightened up when I came
toward the table and walked toward me. He put out his hand, “It is such
a great pleasure that you are here. You were very kind to come to play
with me.”

“It was very nice of you to ask me.”

“Are you quite well? They told me you were wounded on the Isonzo. I hope
you are well again.”

“I’m very well. Have you been well?”

“Oh, I am always well. But I am getting old. I detect signs of age now.”

“I can’t believe it.”

“Yes. Do you want to know one? It is easier for me to talk Italian. I
discipline myself but I find when I am tired that it is so much easier
to talk Italian. So I know I must be getting old.”

“We could talk Italian. I am a little tired too.”

“Oh, but when you are tired it will be easier for you to talk English.”

“American.”

“Yes. American. You will please talk American. It is a delightful
language.”

“I hardly ever see Americans.”

“You must miss them. One misses one’s countrymen and especially one’s
countrywomen. I know that experience. Should we play or are you too
tired?”

“I’m not really tired. I said that for a joke. What handicap will you
give me?”

“Have you been playing very much?”

“None at all.”

“You play very well. Ten points in a hundred?”

“You flatter me.”

“Fifteen?”

“That would be fine but you will beat me.”

“Should we play for a stake? You always wished to play for a stake.”

“I think we’d better.”

“All right. I will give you eighteen points and we will play for a franc
a point.”

He played a lovely game of billiards and with the handicap I was only
four ahead at fifty. Count Greffi pushed a button on the wall to ring
for the barman.

“Open one bottle please,” he said. Then to me, “We will take a little
stimulant.” The wine was icy cold and very dry and good.

“Should we talk Italian? Would you mind very much? It is my great
weakness now.”

We went on playing, sipping the wine between shots, speaking in Italian,
but talking little, concentrated on the game. Count Greffi made his one
hundredth point and with the handicap I was only at ninety-four. He
smiled and patted me on the shoulder.

“Now we will drink the other bottle and you will tell me about the war.”
He waited for me to sit down.

“About anything else,” I said.

“You don’t want to talk about it? Good. What have you been reading?”

“Nothing,” I said. “I’m afraid I am very dull.”

“No. But you should read.”

“What is there written in war-time?”

“There is ‘Le Feu’ by a Frenchman, Barbusse. There is ‘Mr. Britling Sees
Through It.’”

“No, he doesn’t.”

“What?”

“He doesn’t see through it. Those books were at the hospital.”

“Then you have been reading?”

“Yes, but nothing any good.”

“I thought ‘Mr. Britling’ a very good study of the English middle-class
soul.”

“I don’t know about the soul.”

“Poor boy. We none of us know about the soul. Are you _Croyant_?”

“At night.”

Count Greffi smiled and turned the glass with his fingers. “I had
expected to become more devout as I grow older but somehow I haven’t,”
he said. “It is a great pity.”

“Would you like to live after death?” I asked and instantly felt a fool
to mention death. But he did not mind the word.

“It would depend on the life. This life is very pleasant. I would like
to live forever,” he smiled. “I very nearly have.”

We were sitting in the deep leather chairs, the champagne in the
ice-bucket and our glasses on the table between us.

“If you ever live to be as old as I am you will find many things
strange.”

“You never seem old.”

“It is the body that is old. Sometimes I am afraid I will break off a
finger as one breaks a stick of chalk. And the spirit is no older and
not much wiser.”

“You are wise.”

“No, that is the great fallacy; the wisdom of old men. They do not grow
wise. They grow careful.”

“Perhaps that is wisdom.”

“It is a very unattractive wisdom. What do you value most?”

“Some one I love.”

“With me it is the same. That is not wisdom. Do you value life?”

“Yes.”

“So do I. Because it is all I have. And to give birthday parties,” he
laughed. “You are probably wiser than I am. You do not give birthday
parties.”

We both drank the wine.

“What do you think of the war really?” I asked.

“I think it is stupid.”

“Who will win it?”

“Italy.”

“Why?”

“They are a younger nation.”

“Do younger nations always win wars?”

“They are apt to for a time.”

“Then what happens?”

“They become older nations.”

“You said you were not wise.”

“Dear boy, that is not wisdom. That is cynicism.”

“It sounds very wise to me.”

“It’s not particularly. I could quote you the examples on the other
side. But it is not bad. Have we finished the champagne?”

“Almost.”

“Should we drink some more? Then I must dress.”

“Perhaps we’d better not now.”

“You are sure you don’t want more?”

“Yes.” He stood up.

“I hope you will be very fortunate and very happy and very, very
healthy.”

“Thank you. And I hope you will live forever.”

“Thank you. I have. And if you ever become devout pray for me if I am
dead. I am asking several of my friends to do that. I had expected to
become devout myself but it has not come.” I thought he smiled sadly but
I could not tell. He was so old and his face was very wrinkled, so that
a smile used so many lines that all gradations were lost.

“I might become very devout,” I said. “Anyway, I will pray for you.”

“I had always expected to become devout. All my family died very devout.
But somehow it does not come.”

“It’s too early.”

“Maybe it is too late. Perhaps I have outlived my religious feeling.”

“My own comes only at night.”

“Then too you are in love. Do not forget that is a religious feeling.”

“You believe so?”

“Of course.” He took a step toward the table. “You were very kind to
play.”

“It was a great pleasure.”

“We will walk upstairs together.”




                             CHAPTER XXXVI

That night there was a storm and I woke to hear the rain lashing the
window-panes. It was coming in the open window. Some one had knocked on
the door. I went to the door very softly, not to disturb Catherine, and
opened it. The barman stood there. He wore his overcoat and carried his
wet hat.

“Can I speak to you, Tenente?”

“What’s the matter?”

“It’s a very serious matter.”

I looked around. The room was dark. I saw the water on the floor from
the window. “Come in,” I said. I took him by the arm into the bathroom;
locked the door and put on the light. I sat down on the edge of the
bathtub.

“What’s the matter, Emilio? Are you in trouble?”

“No. You are, Tenente.”

“Yes?”

“They are going to arrest you in the morning.”

“Yes?”

“I came to tell you. I was out in the town and I heard them talking in a
café.”

“I see.”

He stood there, his coat wet, holding his wet hat and said nothing.

“Why are they going to arrest me?”

“For something about the war.”

“Do you know what?”

“No. But I know that they know you were here before as an officer and
now you are here out of uniform. After this retreat they arrest
everybody.”

I thought a minute.

“What time do they come to arrest me?”

“In the morning. I don’t know the time.”

“What do you say to do?”

He put his hat in the washbowl. It was very wet and had been dripping on
the floor.

“If you have nothing to fear an arrest is nothing. But it is always bad
to be arrested—especially now.”

“I don’t want to be arrested.”

“Then go to Switzerland.”

“How?”

“In my boat.”

“There is a storm,” I said.

“The storm is over. It is rough but you will be all right.”

“When should we go?”

“Right away. They might come to arrest you early in the morning.”

“What about our bags?”

“Get them packed. Get your lady dressed. I will take care of them.”

“Where will you be?”

“I will wait here. I don’t want any one to see me outside in the hall.”

I opened the door, closed it, and went into the bedroom. Catherine was
awake.

“What is it, darling?”

“It’s all right, Cat,” I said. “Would you like to get dressed right away
and go in a boat to Switzerland?”

“Would you?”

“No,” I said. “I’d like to go back to bed.”

“What is it about?”

“The barman says they are going to arrest me in the morning.”

“Is the barman crazy?”

“No.”

“Then please hurry, darling, and get dressed so we can start.” She sat
up on the side of the bed. She was still sleepy. “Is that the barman in
the bathroom?”

“Yes.”

“Then I won’t wash. Please look the other way, darling, and I’ll be
dressed in just a minute.”

I saw her white back as she took off her nightgown and then I looked
away because she wanted me to. She was beginning to be a little big with
the child and she did not want me to see her. I dressed hearing the rain
on the windows. I did not have much to put in my bag.

“There’s plenty of room in my bag, Cat, if you need any.”

“I’m almost packed,” she said. “Darling, I’m awfully stupid, but why is
the barman in the bathroom?”

“Sh—he’s waiting to take our bags down.”

“He’s awfully nice.”

“He’s an old friend,” I said. “I nearly sent him some pipe-tobacco
once.”

I looked out the open window at the dark night. I could not see the
lake, only the dark and the rain but the wind was quieter.

“I’m ready, darling,” Catherine said.

“All right.” I went to the bathroom door. “Here are the bags, Emilio,” I
said. The barman took the two bags.

“You’re very good to help us,” Catherine said.

“That’s nothing, lady,” the barman said. “I’m glad to help you just so I
don’t get in trouble myself. Listen,” he said to me. “I’ll take these
out the servants’ stairs and to the boat. You just go out as though you
were going for a walk.”

“It’s a lovely night for a walk,” Catherine said.

“It’s a bad night all right.”

“I’m glad I’ve an umbrella,” Catherine said.

We walked down the hall and down the wide thickly carpeted stairs. At
the foot of the stairs by the door the porter sat behind his desk.

He looked surprised at seeing us.

“You’re not going out, sir?” he said.

“Yes,” I said. “We’re going to see the storm along the lake.”

“Haven’t you got an umbrella, sir?”

“No,” I said. “This coat sheds water.”

He looked at it doubtfully. “I’ll get you an umbrella, sir,” he said. He
went away and came back with a big umbrella. “It is a little big, sir,”
he said. I gave him a ten-lira note. “Oh you are too good, sir. Thank
you very much,” he said. He held the door open and we went out into the
rain. He smiled at Catherine and she smiled at him. “Don’t stay out in
the storm,” he said. “You will get wet, sir and lady.” He was only the
second porter, and his English was still literally translated.

“We’ll be back,” I said. We walked down the path under the giant
umbrella and out through the dark wet gardens to the road and across the
road to the trellised pathway along the lake. The wind was blowing
offshore now. It was a cold, wet November wind and I knew it was snowing
in the mountains. We came along past the chained boats in the slips
along the quay to where the barman’s boat should be. The water was dark
against the stone. The barman stepped out from beside the row of trees.

“The bags are in the boat,” he said.

“I want to pay you for the boat,” I said.

“How much money have you?”

“Not so much.”

“You send me the money later. That will be all right.”

“How much?”

“What you want.”

“Tell me how much.”

“If you get through send me five hundred francs. You won’t mind that if
you get through.”

“All right.”

“Here are sandwiches.” He handed me a package. “Everything there was in
the bar. It’s all here. This is a bottle of brandy and a bottle of
wine.” I put them in my bag. “Let me pay you for those.”

“All right, give me fifty lire.”

I gave it to him. “The brandy is good,” he said. “You don’t need to be
afraid to give it to your lady. She better get in the boat.” He held the
boat, it rising and falling against the stone wall and I helped
Catherine in. She sat in the stern and pulled her cape around her.

“You know where to go?”

“Up the lake.”

“You know how far?”

“Past Luino.”

“Past Luino, Cannero, Cannobio, Tranzano. You aren’t in Switzerland
until you come to Brissago. You have to pass Monte Tamara.”

“What time is it?” Catherine asked.

“It’s only eleven o’clock,” I said.

“If you row all the time you ought to be there by seven o’clock in the
morning.”

“Is it that far?”

“It’s thirty-five kilometres.”

“How should we go? In this rain we need a compass.”

“No. Row to Isola Bella. Then on the other side of Isola Madre go with
the wind. The wind will take you to Pallanza. You will see the lights.
Then go up the shore.”

“Maybe the wind will change.”

“No,” he said. “This wind will blow like this for three days. It comes
straight down from the Mattarone. There is a can to bail with.”

“Let me pay you something for the boat now.”

“No, I’d rather take a chance. If you get through you pay me all you
can.”

“All right.”

“I don’t think you’ll get drowned.”

“That’s good.”

“Go with the wind up the lake.”

“All right.” I stepped in the boat.

“Did you leave the money for the hotel?”

“Yes. In an envelope in the room.”

“All right. Good luck, Tenente.”

“Good luck. We thank you many times.”

“You won’t thank me if you get drowned.”

“What does he say?” Catherine asked.

“He says good luck.”

“Good luck,” Catherine said. “Thank you very much.”

“Are you ready?”

“Yes.”

He bent down and shoved us off. I dug at the water with the oars, then
waved one hand. The barman waved back deprecatingly. I saw the lights of
the hotel and rowed out, rowing straight out until they were out of
sight. There was quite a sea running but we were going with the wind.




                             CHAPTER XXXVII

I rowed in the dark keeping the wind in my face. The rain had stopped
and only came occasionally in gusts. It was very dark, and the wind was
cold. I could see Catherine in the stern but I could not see the water
where the blades of the oars dipped. The oars were long and there were
no leathers to keep them from slipping out. I pulled, raised, leaned
forward, found the water, dipped and pulled, rowing as easily as I
could. I did not feather the oars because the wind was with us. I knew
my hands would blister and I wanted to delay it as long as I could. The
boat was light and rowed easily. I pulled it along in the dark water. I
could not see, and hoped we would soon come opposite Pallanza.

We never saw Pallanza. The wind was blowing up the lake and we passed
the point that hides Pallanza in the dark and never saw the lights. When
we finally saw some lights much further up the lake and close to the
shore it was Intra. But for a long time we did not see any lights, nor
did we see the shore but rowed steadily in the dark riding with the
waves. Sometimes I missed the water with the oars in the dark as a wave
lifted the boat. It was quite rough; but I kept on rowing, until
suddenly we were close ashore against a point of rock that rose beside
us; the waves striking against it, rushing high up, then falling back. I
pulled hard on the right oar and backed water with the other and we went
out into the lake again; the point was out of sight and we were going on
up the lake.

“We’re across the lake,” I said to Catherine.

“Weren’t we going to see Pallanza?”

“We’ve missed it.”

“How are you, darling?”

“I’m fine.”

“I could take the oars awhile.”

“No, I’m fine.”

“Poor Ferguson,” Catherine said. “In the morning she’ll come to the
hotel and find we’re gone.”

“I’m not worrying so much about that,” I said, “as about getting into
the Swiss part of the lake before it’s daylight and the custom guards
see us.”

“Is it a long way?”

“It’s thirty some kilometres from here.”



I rowed all night. Finally my hands were so sore I could hardly close
them over the oars. We were nearly smashed up on the shore several
times. I kept fairly close to the shore because I was afraid of getting
lost on the lake and losing time. Sometimes we were so close we could
see a row of trees and the road along the shore with the mountains
behind. The rain stopped and the wind drove the clouds so that the moon
shone through and looking back I could see the long dark point of
Castagnola and the lake with white-caps and beyond, the moon on the high
snow mountains. Then the clouds came over the moon again and the
mountains and the lake were gone, but it was much lighter than it had
been before and we could see the shore. I could see it too clearly and
pulled out where they would not see the boat if there were custom guards
along the Pallanza road. When the moon came out again we could see white
villas on the shore on the slopes of the mountain and the white road
where it showed through the trees. All the time I was rowing.

The lake widened and across it on the shore at the foot of the mountains
on the other side we saw a few lights that should be Luino. I saw a
wedgelike gap between the mountains on the other shore and I thought
that must be Luino. If it was we were making good time. I pulled in the
oars and lay back on the seat. I was very, very tired of rowing. My arms
and shoulders and back ached and my hands were sore.

“I could hold the umbrella,” Catherine said. “We could sail with that
with the wind.”

“Can you steer?”

“I think so.”

“You take this oar and hold it under your arm close to the side of the
boat and steer and I’ll hold the umbrella.” I went back to the stern and
showed her how to hold the oar. I took the big umbrella the porter had
given me and sat facing the bow and opened it. It opened with a clap. I
held it on both sides, sitting astride the handle hooked over the seat.
The wind was full in it and I felt the boat suck forward while I held as
hard as I could to the two edges. It pulled hard. The boat was moving
fast.

“We’re going beautifully,” Catherine said. All I could see was umbrella
ribs. The umbrella strained and pulled and I felt us driving along with
it. I braced my feet and held back on it, then suddenly, it buckled; I
felt a rib snap on my forehead, I tried to grab the top that was bending
with the wind and the whole thing buckled and went inside-out and I was
astride the handle of an inside-out, ripped umbrella, where I had been
holding a wind-filled pulling sail. I unhooked the handle from the seat,
laid the umbrella in the bow and went back to Catherine for the oar. She
was laughing. She took my hand and kept on laughing.

“What’s the matter?” I took the oar.

“You looked so funny holding that thing.”

“I suppose so.”

“Don’t be cross, darling. It was awfully funny. You looked about twenty
feet broad and very affectionate holding the umbrella by the edges—”
she choked.

“I’ll row.”

“Take a rest and a drink. It’s a grand night and we’ve come a long way.”

“I have to keep the boat out of the trough of the waves.”

“I’ll get you a drink. Then rest a little while, darling.”

I held the oars up and we sailed with them. Catherine was opening the
bag. She handed me the brandy bottle. I pulled the cork with my
pocket-knife and took a long drink. It was smooth and hot and the heat
went all through me and I felt warmed and cheerful. “It’s lovely
brandy,” I said. The moon was under again but I could see the shore.
There seemed to be another point going out a long way ahead into the
lake.

“Are you warm enough, Cat?”

“I’m splendid. I’m a little stiff.”

“Bail out that water and you can put your feet down.”

Then I rowed and listened to the oarlocks and the dip and scrape of the
bailing tin under the stern seat.

“Would you give me the bailer?” I said. “I want a drink.”

“It’s awfully dirty.”

“That’s all right. I’ll rinse it.”

I heard Catherine rinsing it over the side. Then she handed it to me
dipped full of water. I was thirsty after the brandy and the water was
icy cold, so cold it made my teeth ache. I looked toward the shore. We
were closer to the long point. There were lights in the bay ahead.

“Thanks,” I said and handed back the tin pail.

“You’re ever so welcome,” Catherine said. “There’s much more if you want
it.”

“Don’t you want to eat something?”

“No. I’ll be hungry in a little while. We’ll save it till then.”

“All right.”

What looked like a point ahead was a long high headland. I went further
out in the lake to pass it. The lake was much narrower now. The moon was
out again and the _guardia di Finanza_ could have seen our boat black on
the water if they had been watching.

“How are you, Cat?” I asked.

“I’m all right. Where are we?”

“I don’t think we have more than about eight miles more.”

“That’s a long way to row, you poor sweet. Aren’t you dead?”

“No. I’m all right. My hands are sore is all.”

We went on up the lake. There was a break in the mountains on the right
bank, a flattening-out with a low shore-line that I thought must be
Cannobio. I stayed a long way out because it was from now on that we ran
the most danger of meeting _guardia_. There was a high dome-capped
mountain on the other shore a way ahead. I was tired. It was no great
distance to row but when you were out of condition it had been a long
way. I knew I had to pass that mountain and go up the lake at least five
miles further before we would be in Swiss water. The moon was almost
down now but before it went down the sky clouded over again and it was
very dark. I stayed well out in the lake, rowing awhile, then resting
and holding the oars so that the wind struck the blades.

“Let me row awhile,” Catherine said.

“I don’t think you ought to.”

“Nonsense. It would be good for me. It would keep me from being too
stiff.”

“I don’t think you should, Cat.”

“Nonsense. Rowing in moderation is very good for the pregnant lady.”

“All right, you row a little moderately. I’ll go back, then you come up.
Hold on to both gunwales when you come up.”

I sat in the stern with my coat on and the collar turned up and watched
Catherine row. She rowed very well but the oars were too long and
bothered her. I opened the bag and ate a couple of sandwiches and took a
drink of the brandy. It made everything much better and I took another
drink.

“Tell me when you’re tired,” I said. Then a little later, “watch out the
oar doesn’t pop you in the tummy.”

“If it did”—Catherine said between strokes—“life might be much
simpler.”

I took another drink of the brandy.

“How are you going?”

“All right.”

“Tell me when you want to stop.”

“All right.”

I took another drink of the brandy, then took hold of the two gunwales
of the boat and moved forward.

“No. I’m going beautifully.”

“Go on back to the stern. I’ve had a grand rest.”

For a while, with the brandy, I rowed easily and steadily. Then I began
to catch crabs and soon I was just chopping along again with a thin
brown taste of bile from having rowed too hard after the brandy.

“Give me a drink of water, will you?” I said.

“That’s easy,” Catherine said.

Before daylight it started to drizzle. The wind was down or we were
protected by mountains that bounded the curve the lake had made. When I
knew daylight was coming I settled down and rowed hard. I did not know
where we were and I wanted to get into the Swiss part of the lake. When
it was beginning to be daylight we were quite close to the shore. I
could see the rocky shore and the trees.

“What’s that?” Catherine said. I rested on the oars and listened. It was
a motor boat chugging out on the lake. I pulled close up to the shore
and lay quiet. The chugging came closer; then we saw the motor boat in
the rain a little astern of us. There were four _guardia_ _di finanza_
in the stern, their _alpini_ hats pulled down, their cape collars turned
up and their carbines slung across their backs. They all looked sleepy
so early in the morning. I could see the yellow on their hats and the
yellow marks on their cape collars. The motor boat chugged on and out of
sight in the rain.

I pulled out into the lake. If we were that close to the border I did
not want to be hailed by a sentry along the road. I stayed out where I
could just see the shore and rowed on for three-quarters of an hour in
the rain. We heard a motor boat once more but I kept quiet until the
noise of the engine went away across the lake.

“I think we’re in Switzerland, Cat,” I said.

“Really?”

“There’s no way to know until we see Swiss troops.”

“Or the Swiss navy.”

“The Swiss navy’s no joke for us. That last motor boat we heard was
probably the Swiss navy.”

“If we’re in Switzerland let’s have a big breakfast. They have wonderful
rolls and butter and jam in Switzerland.”



It was clear daylight now and a fine rain was falling. The wind was
still blowing outside up the lake and we could see the tops of the
white-caps going away from us and up the lake. I was sure we were in
Switzerland now. There were many houses back in the trees from the shore
and up the shore a way was a village with stone houses, some villas on
the hills and a church. I had been looking at the road that skirted the
shore for guards but did not see any. The road came quite close to the
lake now and I saw a soldier coming out of a café on the road. He wore a
gray-green uniform and a helmet like the Germans. He had a
healthy-looking face and a little toothbrush mustache. He looked at us.

“Wave to him,” I said to Catherine. She waved and the soldier smiled
embarrassedly and gave a wave of his hand. I eased up rowing. We were
passing the waterfront of the village.

“We must be well inside the border,” I said.

“We want to be sure, darling. We don’t want them to turn us back at the
frontier.”

“The frontier is a long way back. I think this is the customs town. I’m
pretty sure it’s Brissago.”

“Won’t there be Italians there? There are always both sides at a customs
town.”

“Not in war-time. I don’t think they let the Italians cross the
frontier.”

It was a nice-looking little town. There were many fishing boats along
the quay and nets were spread on racks. There was a fine November rain
falling but it looked cheerful and clean even with the rain.

“Should we land then and have breakfast?”

“All right.”

I pulled hard on the left oar and came in close, then straightened out
when we were close to the quay and brought the boat alongside. I pulled
in the oars, took hold of an iron ring, stepped up on the wet stone and
was in Switzerland. I tied the boat and held my hand down to Catherine.

“Come on up, Cat. It’s a grand feeling.”

“What about the bags?”

“Leave them in the boat.”

Catherine stepped up and we were in Switzerland together.

“What a lovely country,” she said.

“Isn’t it grand?”

“Let’s go and have breakfast!”

“Isn’t it a grand country? I love the way it feels under my shoes.”

“I’m so stiff I can’t feel it very well. But it feels like a splendid
country. Darling, do you realize we’re here and out of that bloody
place?”

“I do. I really do. I’ve never realized anything before.”

“Look at the houses. Isn’t this a fine square? There’s a place we can
get breakfast.”

“Isn’t the rain fine? They never had rain like this in Italy. It’s
cheerful rain.”

“And we’re here, darling! Do you realize we’re here?”

We went inside the café and sat down at a clean wooden table. We were
cockeyed excited. A splendid clean-looking woman with an apron came and
asked us what we wanted.

“Rolls and jam and coffee,” Catherine said.

“I’m sorry, we haven’t any rolls in war-time.”

“Bread then.”

“I can make you some toast.”

“All right.”

“I want some eggs fried too.”

“How many eggs for the gentleman?”

“Three.”

“Take four, darling.”

“Four eggs.”

The woman went away. I kissed Catherine and held her hand very tight. We
looked at each other and at the café.

“Darling, darling, isn’t it lovely?”

“It’s grand,” I said.

“I don’t mind there not being rolls,” Catherine said. “I thought about
them all night. But I don’t mind it. I don’t mind it at all.”

“I suppose pretty soon they will arrest us.”

“Never mind, darling. We’ll have breakfast first. You won’t mind being
arrested after breakfast. And then there’s nothing they can do to us.
We’re British and American citizens in good standing.”

“You have a passport, haven’t you?”

“Of course. Oh let’s not talk about it. Let’s be happy.”

“I couldn’t be any happier,” I said. A fat gray cat with a tail that
lifted like a plume crossed the floor to our table and curved against my
leg to purr each time she rubbed. I reached down and stroked her.
Catherine smiled at me very happily. “Here comes the coffee,” she said.



They arrested us after breakfast. We took a little walk through the
village then went down to the quay to get our bags. A soldier was
standing guard over the boat.

“Is this your boat?”

“Yes.”

“Where do you come from?”

“Up the lake.”

“Then I have to ask you to come with me.”

“How about the bags?”

“You can carry the bags.”

I carried the bags and Catherine walked beside me and the soldier walked
along behind us to the old custom house. In the custom house a
lieutenant, very thin and military, questioned us.

“What nationality are you?”

“American and British.”

“Let me see your passports.”

I gave him mine and Catherine got hers out of her handbag.

He examined them for a long time.

“Why do you enter Switzerland this way in a boat?”

“I am a sportsman,” I said. “Rowing is my great sport. I always row when
I get a chance.”

“Why do you come here?”

“For the winter sport. We are tourists and we want to do the winter
sport.”

“This is no place for winter sport.”

“We know it. We want to go where they have the winter sport.”

“What have you been doing in Italy?”

“I have been studying architecture. My cousin has been studying art.”

“Why do you leave there?”

“We want to do the winter sport. With the war going on you cannot study
architecture.”

“You will please stay where you are,” the lieutenant said. He went back
into the building with our passports.

“You’re splendid, darling,” Catherine said. “Keep on the same track. You
want to do the winter sport.”

“Do you know anything about art?”

“Rubens,” said Catherine.

“Large and fat,” I said.

“Titian,” Catherine said.

“Titian-haired,” I said. “How about Mantegna?”

“Don’t ask hard ones,” Catherine said. “I know him though—very bitter.”

“Very bitter,” I said. “Lots of nail holes.”

“You see I’ll make you a fine wife,” Catherine said. “I’ll be able to
talk art with your customers.”

“Here he comes,” I said. The thin lieutenant came down the length of the
custom house, holding our passports.

“I will have to send you into Locarno,” he said. “You can get a carriage
and a soldier will go in with you.”

“All right,” I said. “What about the boat?”

“The boat is confiscated. What have you in those bags?”

He went all through the two bags and held up the quarter-bottle of
brandy. “Would you join me in a drink?” I asked.

“No thank you.” He straightened up. “How much money have you?”

“Twenty-five hundred lire.”

He was favorably impressed. “How much has your cousin?”

Catherine had a little over twelve hundred lire. The lieutenant was
pleased. His attitude toward us became less haughty.

“If you are going for winter sports,” he said, “Wengen is the place. My
father has a very fine hotel at Wengen. It is open all the time.”

“That’s splendid,” I said. “Could you give me the name?”

“I will write it on a card.” He handed me the card very politely.

“The soldier will take you in to Locarno. He will keep your passports. I
regret this but it is necessary. I have good hopes they will give you a
visa or a police permit at Locarno.”

He handed the two passports to the soldier and carrying the bags we
started into the village to order a carriage. “Hi,” the lieutenant
called to the soldier. He said something in a German dialect to him. The
soldier slung his rifle on his back and picked up the bags.

“It’s a great country,” I said to Catherine.

“It’s so practical.”

“Thank you very much,” I said to the lieutenant. He waved his hand.

_“Service!_” he said. We followed our guard into the village.

We drove to Locarno in a carriage with the soldier sitting on the front
seat with the driver. At Locarno we did not have a bad time. They
questioned us but they were polite because we had passports and money. I
do not think they believed a word of the story and I thought it was
silly but it was like a law-court. You did not want something
reasonable, you wanted something technical and then stuck to it without
explanations. But we had passports and we would spend the money. So they
gave us provisional visas. At any time this visa might be withdrawn. We
were to report to the police wherever we went.

Could we go wherever we wanted? Yes. Where did we want to go?

“Where do you want to go, Cat?”

“Montreux.”

“It is a very nice place,” the official said. “I think you will like
that place.”

“Here at Locarno is a very nice place,” another official said. “I am
sure you would like it here very much at Locarno. Locarno is a very
attractive place.”

“We would like some place where there is winter sport.”

“There is no winter sport at Montreux.”

“I beg your pardon,” the other official said. “I come from Montreux.
There is very certainly winter sport on the Montreux Oberland Bernois
railway. It would be false for you to deny that.”

“I do not deny it. I simply said there is no winter sport at Montreux.”

“I question that,” the other official said. “I question that statement.”

“I hold to that statement.”

“I question that statement. I myself have _luge-ed_ into the streets of
Montreux. I have done it not once but several times. Luge-ing is
certainly winter sport.”

The other official turned to me.

“Is luge-ing your idea of winter sport, sir? I tell you you would be
very comfortable here in Locarno. You would find the climate healthy,
you would find the environs attractive. You would like it very much.”

“The gentleman has expressed a wish to go to Montreux.”

“What is luge-ing?” I asked.

“You see he has never even heard of luge-ing!”

That meant a great deal to the second official. He was pleased by that.

“Luge-ing,” said the first official, “is tobogganing.”

“I beg to differ,” the other official shook his head. “I must differ
again. The toboggan is very different from the luge. The toboggan is
constructed in Canada of flat laths. The luge is a common sled with
runners. Accuracy means something.”

“Couldn’t we toboggan?” I asked.

“Of course you could toboggan,” the first official said. “You could
toboggan very well. Excellent Canadian toboggans are sold in Montreux.
Ochs Brothers sell toboggans. They import their own toboggans.”

The second official turned away. “Tobogganing,” he said, “requires a
special _piste_. You could not toboggan into the streets of Montreux.
Where are you stopping here?”

“We don’t know,” I said. “We just drove in from Brissago. The carriage
is outside.”

“You make no mistake in going to Montreux,” the first official said.
“You will find the climate delightful and beautiful. You will have no
distance to go for winter sport.”

“If you really want winter sport,” the second official said, “you will
go to the Engadine or to Mürren. I must protest against your being
advised to go to Montreux for the winter sport.”

“At Les Avants above Montreux there is excellent winter sport of every
sort.” The champion of Montreux glared at his colleague.

“Gentlemen,” I said, “I am afraid we must go. My cousin is very tired.
We will go tentatively to Montreux.”

“I congratulate you,” the first official shook my hand.

“I believe that you will regret leaving Locarno,” the second official
said. “At any rate you will report to the police at Montreux.”

“There will be no unpleasantness with the police,” the first official
assured me. “You will find all the inhabitants extremely courteous and
friendly.”

“Thank you both very much,” I said. “We appreciate your advice very
much.”

“Good-by,” Catherine said. “Thank you both very much.”

They bowed us to the door, the champion of Locarno a little coldly. We
went down the steps and into the carriage.

“My God, darling,” Catherine said. “Couldn’t we have gotten away any
sooner?” I gave the name of a hotel one of the officials had recommended
to the driver. He picked up the reins.

“You’ve forgotten the army,” Catherine said. The soldier was standing by
the carriage. I gave him a ten-lira note. “I have no Swiss money yet,” I
said. He thanked me, saluted and went off. The carriage started and we
drove to the hotel.

“How did you happen to pick out Montreux?” I asked Catherine. “Do you
really want to go there?”

“It was the first place I could think of,” she said. “It’s not a bad
place. We can find some place up in the mountains.”

“Are you sleepy?”

“I’m asleep right now.”

“We’ll get a good sleep. Poor Cat, you had a long bad night.”

“I had a lovely time,” Catherine said. “Especially when you sailed with
the umbrella.”

“Can you realize we’re in Switzerland?”

“No, I’m afraid I’ll wake up and it won’t be true.”

“I am too.”

“It is true, isn’t it, darling? I’m not just driving down to the
_stazione_ in Milan to see you off.”

“I hope not.”

“Don’t say that. It frightens me. Maybe that’s where we’re going.”

“I’m so groggy I don’t know,” I said.

“Let me see your hands.”

I put them out. They were both blistered raw.

“There’s no hole in my side,” I said.

“Don’t be sacrilegious.”

I felt very tired and vague in the head. The exhilaration was all gone.
The carriage was going along the street.

“Poor hands,” Catherine said.

“Don’t touch them,” I said. “By God I don’t know where we are. Where are
we going, driver?” The driver stopped his horse.

“To the Hotel Metropole. Don’t you want to go there?”

“Yes,” I said. “It’s all right, Cat.”

“It’s all right, darling. Don’t be upset. We’ll get a good sleep and you
won’t feel groggy to-morrow.”

“I get pretty groggy,” I said. “It’s like a comic opera to-day. Maybe
I’m hungry.”

“You’re just tired, darling. You’ll be fine.” The carriage pulled up
before the hotel. Some one came out to take our bags.

“I feel all right,” I said. We were down on the pavement going into the
hotel.

“I know you’ll be all right. You’re just tired. You’ve been up a long
time.”

“Anyhow we’re here.”

“Yes, we’re really here.”

We followed the boy with the bags into the hotel.




                                 BOOK V




                            CHAPTER XXXVIII

That fall the snow came very late. We lived in a brown wooden house in
the pine trees on the side of the mountain and at night there was frost
so that there was thin ice over the water in the two pitchers on the
dresser in the morning. Mrs. Guttingen came into the room early in the
morning to shut the windows and started a fire in the tall porcelain
stove. The pine wood crackled and sparked and then the fire roared in
the stove and the second time Mrs. Guttingen came into the room she
brought big chunks of wood for the fire and a pitcher of hot water. When
the room was warm she brought in breakfast. Sitting up in bed eating
breakfast we could see the lake and the mountains across the lake on the
French side. There was snow on the tops of the mountains and the lake
was a gray steel-blue.

Outside, in front of the chalet a road went up the mountain. The wheel
ruts and ridges were iron hard with the frost, and the road climbed
steadily through the forest and up and around the mountain to where
there were meadows, and barns and cabins in the meadows at the edge of
the woods looking across the valley. The valley was deep and there was a
stream at the bottom that flowed down into the lake and when the wind
blew across the valley you could hear the stream in the rocks.

Sometimes we went off the road and on a path through the pine forest.
The floor of the forest was soft to walk on; the frost did not harden it
as it did the road. But we did not mind the hardness of the road because
we had nails in the soles and heels of our boots and the heel nails bit
on the frozen ruts and with nailed boots it was good walking on the road
and invigorating. But it was lovely walking in the woods.

In front of the house where we lived the mountain went down steeply to
the little plain along the lake and we sat on the porch of the house in
the sun and saw the winding of the road down the mountain-side and the
terraced vineyards on the side of the lower mountain, the vines all dead
now for the winter and the fields divided by stone walls, and below the
vineyards the houses of the town on the narrow plain along the lake
shore. There was an island with two trees on the lake and the trees
looked like the double sails of a fishing-boat. The mountains were sharp
and steep on the other side of the lake and down at the end of the lake
was the plain of the Rhone Valley flat between the two ranges of
mountains; and up the valley where the mountains cut it off was the Dent
du Midi. It was a high snowy mountain and it dominated the valley but it
was so far away that it did not make a shadow.

When the sun was bright we ate lunch on the porch but the rest of the
time we ate upstairs in a small room with plain wooden walls and a big
stove in the corner. We bought books and magazines in the town and a
copy of “Hoyle” and learned many two-handed card games. The small room
with the stove was our living-room. There were two comfortable chairs
and a table for books and magazines and we played cards on the
dining-table when it was cleared away. Mr. and Mrs. Guttingen lived
downstairs and we would hear them talking sometimes in the evening and
they were very happy together too. He had been a headwaiter and she had
worked as maid in the same hotel and they had saved their money to buy
this place. They had a son who was studying to be a headwaiter. He was
at a hotel in Zurich. Downstairs there was a parlor where they sold wine
and beer, and sometimes in the evening we would hear carts stop outside
on the road and men come up the steps to go in the parlor to drink wine.

There was a box of wood in the hall outside the living-room and I kept
up the fire from it. But we did not stay up very late. We went to bed in
the dark in the big bedroom and when I was undressed I opened the
windows and saw the night and the cold stars and the pine trees below
the window and then got into bed as fast as I could. It was lovely in
bed with the air so cold and clear and the night outside the window. We
slept well and if I woke in the night I knew it was from only one cause
and I would shift the feather bed over, very softly so that Catherine
would not be wakened and then go back to sleep again, warm and with the
new lightness of thin covers. The war seemed as far away as the football
games of some one else’s college. But I knew from the papers that they
were still fighting in the mountains because the snow would not come.



Sometimes we walked down the mountain into Montreux. There was a path
went down the mountain but it was steep and so usually we took the road
and walked down on the wide hard road between fields and then below
between the stone walls of the vineyards and on down between the houses
of the villages along the way. There were three villages; Chernex,
Fontanivent, and the other I forget. Then along the road we passed an
old square-built stone château on a ledge on the side of the
mountain-side with the terraced fields of vines, each vine tied to a
stick to hold it up, the vines dry and brown and the earth ready for the
snow and the lake down below flat and gray as steel. The road went down
a long grade below the château and then turned to the right and went
down very steeply and paved with cobbles, into Montreux.

We did not know any one in Montreux. We walked along beside the lake and
saw the swans and the many gulls and terns that flew up when you came
close and screamed while they looked down at the water. Out on the lake
there were flocks of grebes, small and dark, and leaving trails in the
water when they swam. In the town we walked along the main street and
looked in the windows of the shops. There were many big hotels that were
closed but most of the shops were open and the people were very glad to
see us. There was a fine coiffeur’s place where Catherine went to have
her hair done. The woman who ran it was very cheerful and the only
person we knew in Montreux. While Catherine was there I went up to a
beer place and drank dark Munich beer and read the papers. I read the
_Corriere Della Sera_ and the English and American papers from Paris.
All the advertisements were blacked out, supposedly to prevent
communication in that way with the enemy. The papers were bad reading.
Everything was going very badly everywhere. I sat back in the corner
with a heavy mug of dark beer and an opened glazed-paper package of
pretzels and ate the pretzels for the salty flavor and the good way they
made the beer taste and read about disaster. I thought Catherine would
come by but she did not come, so I hung the papers back on the rack,
paid for my beer and went up the street to look for her. The day was
cold and dark and wintry and the stone of the houses looked cold.
Catherine was still in the hair-dresser’s shop. The woman was waving her
hair. I sat in the little booth and watched. It was exciting to watch
and Catherine smiled and talked to me and my voice was a little thick
from being excited. The tongs made a pleasant clicking sound and I could
see Catherine in three mirrors and it was pleasant and warm in the
booth. Then the woman put up Catherine’s hair, and Catherine looked in
the mirror and changed it a little, taking out and putting in pins; then
stood up. “I’m sorry to have taken such a long time.”

“Monsieur was very interested. Were you not, monsieur?” the woman
smiled.

“Yes,” I said.

We went out and up the street. It was cold and wintry and the wind was
blowing. “Oh, darling, I love you so,” I said.

“Don’t we have a fine time?” Catherine said. “Look. Let’s go some place
and have beer instead of tea. It’s very good for young Catherine. It
keeps her small.”

“Young Catherine,” I said. “That loafer.”

“She’s been very good,” Catherine said. “She makes very little trouble.
The doctor says beer will be good for me and keep her small.”

“If you keep her small enough and she’s a boy, maybe he will be a
jockey.”

“I suppose if we really have this child we ought to get married,”
Catherine said. We were in the beer place at the corner table. It was
getting dark outside. It was still early but the day was dark and the
dusk was coming early.

“Let’s get married now,” I said.

“No,” Catherine said. “It’s too embarrassing now. I show too plainly. I
won’t go before any one and be married in this state.”

“I wish we’d gotten married.”

“I suppose it would have been better. But when could we, darling?”

“I don’t know.”

“I know one thing. I’m not going to be married in this splendid matronly
state.”

“You’re not matronly.”

“Oh yes, I am, darling. The hairdresser asked me if this was our first.
I lied and said no, we had two boys and two girls.”

“When will we be married?”

“Any time after I’m thin again. We want to have a splendid wedding with
every one thinking what a handsome young couple.”

“And you’re not worried?”

“Darling, why should I be worried? The only time I ever felt badly was
when I felt like a whore in Milan and that only lasted seven minutes and
besides it was the room furnishings. Don’t I make you a good wife?”

“You’re a lovely wife.”

“Then don’t be too technical, darling. I’ll marry you as soon as I’m
thin again.”

“All right.”

“Do you think I ought to drink another beer? The doctor said I was
rather narrow in the hips and it’s all for the best if we keep young
Catherine small.”

“What else did he say?” I was worried.

“Nothing. I have a wonderful blood-pressure, darling. He admired my
blood-pressure greatly.”

“What did he say about you being too narrow in the hips?”

“Nothing. Nothing at all. He said I shouldn’t ski.”

“Quite right.”

“He said it was too late to start if I’d never done it before. He said I
could ski if I wouldn’t fall down.”

“He’s just a big-hearted joker.”

“Really he was very nice. We’ll have him when the baby comes.”

“Did you ask him if you ought to get married?”

“No. I told him we’d been married four years. You see, darling, if I
marry you I’ll be an American and any time we’re married under American
law the child is legitimate.”

“Where did you find that out?”

“In the New York _World Almanac_ in the library.”

“You’re a grand girl.”

“I’ll be very glad to be an American and we’ll go to America won’t we,
darling? I want to see Niagara Falls.”

“You’re a fine girl.”

“There’s something else I want to see but I can’t remember it.”

“The stockyards?”

“No. I can’t remember it.”

“The Woolworth building?”

“No.”

“The Grand Canyon?”

“No. But I’d like to see that.”

“What was it?”

“The Golden Gate! That’s what I want to see. Where is the Golden Gate?”

“San Francisco.”

“Then let’s go there. I want to see San Francisco anyway.”

“All right. We’ll go there.”

“Now let’s go up the mountain. Should we? Can we get the M. O. B.?”

“There’s a train a little after five.”

“Let’s get that.”

“All right. I’ll drink one more beer first.”

When we went out to go up the street and climb the stairs to the station
it was very cold. A cold wind was coming down the Rhone valley. There
were lights in the shop windows and we climbed the steep stone stairway
to the upper street, then up another stairs to the station. The electric
train was there waiting, all the lights on. There was a dial that showed
when it left. The clock hands pointed to ten minutes after five. I
looked at the station clock. It was five minutes after. As we got on
board I saw the motorman and conductor coming out of the station wine
shop. We sat down and opened the window. The train was electrically
heated and stuffy but fresh cold air came in through the window.

“Are you tired, Cat?” I asked.

“No. I feel splendid.”

“It isn’t a long ride.”

“I like the ride,” she said. “Don’t worry about me, darling. I feel
fine.”



Snow did not come until three days before Christmas. We woke one morning
and it was snowing. We stayed in bed with the fire roaring in the stove
and watched the snow fall. Mrs. Guttingen took away the breakfast trays
and put more wood in the stove. It was a big snow storm. She said it had
started about midnight. I went to the window and looked out but could
not see across the road. It was blowing and snowing wildly. I went back
to bed and we lay and talked.

“I wish I could ski,” Catherine said. “It’s rotten not to be able to
ski.”

“We’ll get a bobsled and come down the road. That’s no worse for you
than riding in a car.”

“Won’t it be rough?”

“We can see.”

“I hope it won’t be too rough.”

“After a while we’ll take a walk in the snow.”

“Before lunch,” Catherine said, “so we’ll have a good appetite.”

“I’m always hungry.”

“So am I.”

We went out in the snow but it was drifted so that we could not walk
far. I went ahead and made a trail down to the station but when we
reached there we had gone far enough. The snow was blowing so we could
hardly see and we went into the little inn by the station and swept each
other off with a broom and sat on a bench and had vermouths.

“It is a big storm,” the barmaid said.

“Yes.”

“The snow is very late this year.”

“Yes.”

“Could I eat a chocolate bar?” Catherine asked. “Or is it too close to
lunch? I’m always hungry.”

“Go on and eat one,” I said.

“I’ll take one with filberts,” Catherine said.

“They are very good,” the girl said, “I like them the best.”

“I’ll have another vermouth,” I said.

When we came out to start back up the road our track was filled in by
the snow. There were only faint indentations where the holes had been.
The snow blew in our faces so we could hardly see. We brushed off and
went in to have lunch. Mr. Guttingen served the lunch.

“To-morrow there will be skiing,” he said. “Do you ski, Mr. Henry?”

“No. But I want to learn.”

“You will learn very easily. My boy will be here for Christmas and he
will teach you.”

“That’s fine. When does he come?”

“To-morrow night.”

When we were sitting by the stove in the little room after lunch looking
out the window at the snow coming down Catherine said, “Wouldn’t you
like to go on a trip somewhere by yourself, darling, and be with men and
ski?”

“No. Why should I?”

“I should think sometimes you would want to see other people besides
me.”

“Do you want to see other people?”

“No.”

“Neither do I.”

“I know. But you’re different. I’m having a child and that makes me
contented not to do anything. I know I’m awfully stupid now and I talk
too much and I think you ought to get away so you won’t be tired of me.

“Do you want me to go away?”

“No. I want you to stay.”

“That’s what I’m going to do.”

“Come over here,” she said. “I want to feel the bump on your head. It’s
a big bump.” She ran her finger over it. “Darling, would you like to
grow a beard?”

“Would you like me to?”

“It might be fun. I’d like to see you with a beard.”

“All right. I’ll grow one. I’ll start now this minute. It’s a good idea.
It will give me something to do.”

“Are you worried because you haven’t anything to do?”

“No. I like it. I have a fine life. Don’t you?”

“I have a lovely life. But I was afraid because I’m big now that maybe I
was a bore to you.”

“Oh, Cat. You don’t know how crazy I am about you.”

“This way?”

“Just the way you are. I have a fine time. Don’t we have a good life?”

“I do, but I thought maybe you were restless.”

“No. Sometimes I wonder about the front and about people I know but I
don’t worry. I don’t think about anything much.”

“Who do you wonder about?”

“About Rinaldi and the priest and lots of people I know. But I don’t
think about them much. I don’t want to think about the war. I’m through
with it.”

“What are you thinking about now?”

“Nothing.”

“Yes you were. Tell me.”

“I was wondering whether Rinaldi had the syphilis.”

“Was that all?”

“Yes.”

“Has he the syphilis?”

“I don’t know.”

“I’m glad you haven’t. Did you ever have anything like that?”

“I had gonorrhea.”

“I don’t want to hear about it. Was it very painful, darling?”

“Very.”

“I wish I’d had it.”

“No you don’t.”

“I do. I wish I’d had it to be like you. I wish I’d stayed with all your
girls so I could make fun of them to you.”

“That’s a pretty picture.”

“It’s not a pretty picture you having gonorrhea.”

“I know it. Look at it snow now.”

“I’d rather look at you. Darling, why don’t you let your hair grow?”

“How grow?”

“Just grow a little longer.”

“It’s long enough now.”

“No, let it grow a little longer and I could cut mine and we’d be just
alike only one of us blonde and one of us dark.”

“I wouldn’t let you cut yours.”

“It would be fun. I’m tired of it. It’s an awful nuisance in the bed at
night.”

“I like it.”

“Wouldn’t you like it short?”

“I might. I like it the way it is.”

“It might be nice short. Then we’d both be alike. Oh, darling, I want
you so much I want to be you too.”

“You are. We’re the same one.”

“I know it. At night we are.”

“The nights are grand.”

“I want us to be all mixed up. I don’t want you to go away. I just said
that. You go if you want to. But hurry right back. Why, darling, I don’t
live at all when I’m not with you.”

“I won’t ever go away,” I said. “I’m no good when you’re not there. I
haven’t any life at all any more.”

“I want you to have a life. I want you to have a fine life. But we’ll
have it together, won’t we?”

“And now do you want me to stop growing my beard or let it go on?”

“Go on. Grow it. It will be exciting. Maybe it will be done for New
Year’s.”

“Now do you want to play chess?”

“I’d rather play with you.”

“No. Let’s play chess.”

“And afterward we’ll play?”

“Yes.”

“All right.”

I got out the chess-board and arranged the pieces. It was still snowing
hard outside.



One time in the night I woke up and knew that Catherine was awake too.
The moon was shining in the window and made shadows on the bed from the
bars on the window-panes.

“Are you awake, sweetheart?”

“Yes. Can’t you sleep?”

“I just woke up thinking about how I was nearly crazy when I first met
you. Do you remember?”

“You were just a little crazy.”

“I’m never that way any more. I’m grand now. You say grand so sweetly.
Say grand.”

“Grand.”

“Oh, you’re sweet. And I’m not crazy now. I’m just very, very, very
happy.”

“Go on to sleep,” I said.

“All right. Let’s go to sleep at exactly the same moment.”

“All right.”

But we did not. I was awake for quite a long time thinking about things
and watching Catherine sleeping, the moonlight on her face. Then I went
to sleep, too.




                             CHAPTER XXXIX

By the middle of January I had a beard and the winter had settled into
bright cold days and hard cold nights. We could walk on the roads again.
The snow was packed hard and smooth by the hay-sleds and wood-sledges
and the logs that were hauled down the mountain. The snow lay over all
the country, down almost to Montreux. The mountains on the other side of
the lake were all white and the plain of the Rhone valley was covered.
We took long walks on the other side of the mountain to the Bains de
l’Alliaz. Catherine wore hobnailed boots and a cape and carried a stick
with a sharp steel point. She did not look big with the cape and we
would not walk too fast but stopped and sat on logs by the roadside to
rest when she was tired.

There was an inn in the trees at the Bains de l’Alliaz where the
woodcutters stopped to drink, and we sat inside warmed by the stove and
drank hot red wine with spices and lemon in it. They called it
_glühwein_ and it was a good thing to warm you and to celebrate with.
The inn was dark and smoky inside and afterward when you went out the
cold air came sharply into your lungs and numbed the edge of your nose
as you inhaled. We looked back at the inn with light coming from the
windows and the woodcutters’ horses stamping and jerking their heads
outside to keep warm. There was frost on the hairs of their muzzles and
their breathing made plumes of frost in the air. Going up the road
toward home the road was smooth and slippery for a while and the ice
orange from the horses until the wood-hauling track turned off. Then the
road was clean-packed snow and led through the woods, and twice coming
home in the evening, we saw foxes.

It was a fine country and every time that we went out it was fun.

“You have a splendid beard now,” Catherine said. “It looks just like the
woodcutters’. Did you see the man with the tiny gold ear-rings?”

“He’s a chamois hunter,” I said. “They wear them because they say it
makes them hear better.”

“Really? I don’t believe it. I think they wear them to show they are
chamois hunters. Are there chamois near here?”

“Yes, beyond the Dent de Jaman.”

“It was fun seeing the fox.”

“When he sleeps he wraps that tail around him to keep warm.”

“It must be a lovely feeling.”

“I always wanted to have a tail like that. Wouldn’t it be fun if we had
brushes like a fox?”

“It might be very difficult dressing.”

“We’d have clothes made, or live in a country where it wouldn’t make any
difference.”

“We live in a country where nothing makes any difference. Isn’t it grand
how we never see any one? You don’t want to see people do you, darling?”

“No.”

“Should we sit here just a minute? I’m a little bit tired.”

We sat close together on the logs. Ahead the road went down through the
forest.

“She won’t come between us, will she? The little brat.”

“No. We won’t let her.”

“How are we for money?”

“We have plenty. They honored the last sight draft.”

“Won’t your family try and get hold of you now they know you’re in
Switzerland?”

“Probably. I’ll write them something.”

“Haven’t you written them?”

“No. Only the sight draft.”

“Thank God I’m not your family.”

“I’ll send them a cable.”

“Don’t you care anything about them?”

“I did, but we quarrelled so much it wore itself out.”

“I think I’d like them. I’d probably like them very much.”

“Let’s not talk about them or I’ll start to worry about them.” After a
while I said, “Let’s go on if you’re rested.”

“I’m rested.”

We went on down the road. It was dark now and the snow squeaked under
our boots. The night was dry and cold and very clear.

“I love your beard,” Catherine said. “It’s a great success. It looks so
stiff and fierce and it’s very soft and a great pleasure.”

“Do you like it better than without?”

“I think so. You know, darling, I’m not going to cut my hair now until
after young Catherine’s born. I look too big and matronly now. But after
she’s born and I’m thin again I’m going to cut it and then I’ll be a
fine new and different girl for you. We’ll go together and get it cut,
or I’ll go alone and come and surprise you.”

I did not say anything.

“You won’t say I can’t, will you?”

“No. I think it would be exciting.”

“Oh, you’re so sweet. And maybe I’d look lovely, darling, and be so thin
and exciting to you and you’ll fall in love with me all over again.”

“Hell,” I said, “I love you enough now. What do you want to do? Ruin
me?”

“Yes. I want to ruin you.”

“Good,” I said, “that’s what I want too.”




                               CHAPTER XL

We had a fine life. We lived through the months of January and February
and the winter was very fine and we were very happy. There had been
short thaws when the wind blew warm and the snow softened and the air
felt like Spring, but always the clear hard cold had come again and the
winter had returned. In March came the first break in the winter. In the
night it started raining. It rained on all morning and turned the snow
to slush and made the mountain-side dismal. There were clouds over the
lake and over the valley. It was raining high up the mountain. Catherine
wore heavy overshoes and I wore Mr. Guttingen’s rubber-boots and we
walked to the station under an umbrella, through the slush and the
running water that was washing the ice of the roads bare, to stop at the
pub before lunch for a vermouth. Outside we could hear the rain.

“Do you think we ought to move into town?”

“What do you think?” Catherine asked.

“If the winter is over and the rain keeps up it won’t be fun up here.
How long is it before young Catherine?”

“About a month. Perhaps a little more.”

“We might go down and stay in Montreux.”

“Why don’t we go to Lausanne? That’s where the hospital is.”

“All right. But I thought maybe that was too big a town.”

“We can be as much alone in a bigger town and Lausanne might be nice.”

“When should we go?”

“I don’t care. Whenever you want, darling. I don’t want to leave here if
you don’t want.”

“Let’s see how the weather turns out.”

It rained for three days. The snow was all gone now on the mountain-side
below the station. The road was a torrent of muddy snow-water. It was
too wet and slushy to go out. On the morning of the third day of rain we
decided to go down into town.

“That is all right, Mr. Henry,” Guttingen said. “You do not have to give
me any notice. I did not think you would want to stay now the bad
weather is come.”

“We have to be near the hospital anyway on account of Madame,” I said.

“I understand,” he said. “Will you come back some time and stay, with
the little one?”

“Yes, if you would have room.”

“In the Spring when it is nice you could come and enjoy it. We could put
the little one and the nurse in the big room that is closed now and you
and Madame could have your same room looking out over the lake.”

“I’ll write about coming,” I said. We packed and left on the train that
went down after lunch. Mr. and Mrs. Guttingen came down to the station
with us and he hauled our baggage down on a sled through the slush. They
stood beside the station in the rain waving good-by.

“They were very sweet,” Catherine said.

“They were fine to us.”

We took the train to Lausanne from Montreux. Looking out the window
toward where we had lived you could not see the mountains for the
clouds. The train stopped in Vevey, then went on, passing the lake on
one side and on the other the wet brown fields and the bare woods and
the wet houses. We came into Lausanne and went into a medium-sized hotel
to stay. It was still raining as we drove through the streets and into
the carriage entrance of the hotel. The concierge with brass keys on his
lapels, the elevator, the carpets on the floors, and the white washbowls
with shining fixtures, the brass bed and the big comfortable bedroom all
seemed very great luxury after the Guttingens. The windows of the room
looked out on a wet garden with a wall topped by an iron fence. Across
the street, which sloped steeply, was another hotel with a similar wall
and garden. I looked out at the rain falling in the fountain of the
garden.

Catherine turned on all the lights and commenced unpacking. I ordered a
whiskey and soda and lay on the bed and read the papers I had bought at
the station. It was March, 1918, and the German offensive had started in
France. I drank the whiskey and soda and read while Catherine unpacked
and moved around the room.

“You know what I have to get, darling,” she said.

“What?”

“Baby clothes. There aren’t many people reach my time without baby
things.”

“You can buy them.”

“I know. That’s what I’ll do to-morrow. I’ll find out what is
necessary.”

“You ought to know. You were a nurse.”

“But so few of the soldiers had babies in the hospitals.”

“I did.”

She hit me with the pillow and spilled the whiskey and soda.

“I’ll order you another,” she said. “I’m sorry I spilled it.”

“There wasn’t much left. Come on over to the bed.”

“No. I have to try and make this room look like something.”

“Like what?”

“Like our home.”

“Hang out the Allied flags.”

“Oh shut up.”

“Say it again.”

“Shut up.”

“You say it so cautiously,” I said. “As though you didn’t want to offend
any one.”

“I don’t.”

“Then come over to the bed.”

“All right.” She came and sat on the bed. “I know I’m no fun for you,
darling. I’m like a big flour-barrel.”

“No you’re not. You’re beautiful and you’re sweet.”

“I’m just something very ungainly that you’ve married.”

“No you’re not. You’re more beautiful all the time.”

“But I will be thin again, darling.”

“You’re thin now.”

“You’ve been drinking.”

“Just whiskey and soda.”

“There’s another one coming,” she said. “And then should we order dinner
up here?”

“That will be good.”

“Then we won’t go out, will we? We’ll just stay in to-night.”

“And play,” I said.

“I’ll drink some wine,” Catherine said. “It won’t hurt me. Maybe we can
get some of our old white capri.”

“I know we can,” I said. “They’ll have Italian wines at a hotel this
size.”

The waiter knocked at the door. He brought the whiskey in a glass with
ice and beside the glass on a tray a small bottle of soda.

“Thank you,” I said. “Put it down there. Will you please have dinner for
two brought up here and two bottles of dry white capri in ice.”

“Do you wish to commence your dinner with soup?”

“Do you want soup, Cat?”

“Please.”

“Bring soup for one.”

“Thank you, sir.” He went out and shut the door. I went back to the
papers and the war in the papers and poured the soda slowly over the ice
into the whiskey. I would have to tell them not to put ice in the
whiskey. Let them bring the ice separately. That way you could tell how
much whiskey there was and it would not suddenly be too thin from the
soda. I would get a bottle of whiskey and have them bring ice and soda.
That was the sensible way. Good whiskey was very pleasant. It was one of
the pleasant parts of life.

“What are you thinking, darling?”

“About whiskey.”

“What about whiskey?”

“About how nice it is.”

Catherine made a face. “All right,” she said.



We stayed at that hotel three weeks. It was not bad; the dining-room was
usually empty and very often we ate in our room at night. We walked in
the town and took the cogwheel railway down to Ouchy and walked beside
the lake. The weather became quite warm and it was like Spring. We
wished we were back in the mountains but the Spring weather lasted only
a few days and then the cold rawness of the breaking-up of winter came
again.

Catherine bought the things she needed for the baby, up in the town. I
went to a gymnasium in the arcade to box for exercise. I usually went up
there in the morning while Catherine stayed late in bed. On the days of
false Spring it was very nice, after boxing and taking a shower, to walk
along the streets smelling the Spring in the air and stop at a café to
sit and watch the people and read the paper and drink a vermouth; then
go down to the hotel and have lunch with Catherine. The professor at the
boxing gymnasium wore mustaches and was very precise and jerky and went
all to pieces if you started after him. But it was pleasant in the gym.
There was good air and light and I worked quite hard, skipping rope,
shadow-boxing, doing abdominal exercises lying on the floor in a patch
of sunlight that came through the open window, and occasionally scaring
the professor when we boxed. I could not shadow-box in front of the
narrow long mirror at first because it looked so strange to see a man
with a beard boxing. But finally I just thought it was funny. I wanted
to take off the beard as soon as I started boxing but Catherine did not
want me to.

Sometimes Catherine and I went for rides out in the country in a
carriage. It was nice to ride when the days were pleasant and we found
two good places where we could ride out to eat. Catherine could not walk
very far now and I loved to ride out along the country roads with her.
When there was a good day we had a splendid time and we never had a bad
time. We knew the baby was very close now and it gave us both a feeling
as though something were hurrying us and we could not lose any time
together.




                              CHAPTER XLI

One morning I awoke about three o’clock hearing Catherine stirring in
the bed.

“Are you all right, Cat?”

“I’ve been having some pains, darling.”

“Regularly?”

“No, not very.”

“If you have them at all regularly we’ll go to the hospital.”

I was very sleepy and went back to sleep. A little while later I woke
again.

“Maybe you’d better call up the doctor,” Catherine said. “I think maybe
this is it.”

I went to the phone and called the doctor. “How often are the pains
coming?” he asked.

“How often are they coming, Cat?”

“I should think every quarter of an hour.”

“You should go to the hospital then,” the doctor said. “I will dress and
go there right away myself.”

I hung up and called the garage near the station to send up a taxi. No
one answered the phone for a long time. Then I finally got a man who
promised to send up a taxi at once. Catherine was dressing. Her bag was
all packed with the things she would need at the hospital and the baby
things. Outside in the hall I rang for the elevator. There was no
answer. I went downstairs. There was no one downstairs except the
night-watchman. I brought the elevator up myself, put Catherine’s bag in
it, she stepped in and we went down. The night-watchman opened the door
for us and we sat outside on the stone slabs beside the stairs down to
the driveway and waited for the taxi. The night was clear and the stars
were out. Catherine was very excited.

“I’m so glad it’s started,” she said. “Now in a little while it will be
all over.”

“You’re a good brave girl.”

“I’m not afraid. I wish the taxi would come, though.”

We heard it coming up the street and saw its headlights. It turned into
the driveway and I helped Catherine in and the driver put the bag up in
front.

“Drive to the hospital,” I said.

We went out of the driveway and started up the hill.

At the hospital we went in and I carried the bag. There was a woman at
the desk who wrote down Catherine’s name, age, address, relatives and
religion, in a book. She said she had no religion and the woman drew a
line in the space after that word. She gave her name as Catherine Henry.

“I will take you up to your room,” she said. We went up in an elevator.
The woman stopped it and we stepped out and followed her down a hall.
Catherine held tight to my arm.

“This is the room,” the woman said. “Will you please undress and get
into bed? Here is a nightgown for you to wear.”

“I have a nightgown,” Catherine said.

“It is better for you to wear this nightgown,” the woman said.

I went outside and sat on a chair in the hallway.

“You can come in now,” the woman said from the doorway. Catherine was
lying in the narrow bed wearing a plain, square-cut nightgown that
looked as though it were made of rough sheeting. She smiled at me.

“I’m having fine pains now,” she said. The woman was holding her wrist
and timing the pains with a watch.

“That was a big one,” Catherine said. I saw it on her face.

“Where’s the doctor?” I asked the woman.

“He’s lying down sleeping. He will be here when he is needed.”

“I must do something for Madame, now,” the nurse said. “Would you please
step out again?”

I went out into the hall. It was a bare hall with two windows and closed
doors all down the corridor. It smelled of hospital. I sat on the chair
and looked at the floor and prayed for Catherine.

“You can come in,” the nurse said. I went in.

“Hello, darling,” Catherine said.

“How is it?”

“They are coming quite often now.” Her face drew up. Then she smiled.

“That was a real one. Do you want to put your hand on my back again,
nurse?”

“If it helps you,” the nurse said.

“You go away, darling,” Catherine said. “Go out and get something to
eat. I may do this for a long time the nurse says.”

“The first labor is usually protracted,” the nurse said.

“Please go out and get something to eat,” Catherine said. “I’m fine,
really.”

“I’ll stay awhile,” I said.

The pains came quite regularly, then slackened off. Catherine was very
excited. When the pains were bad she called them good ones. When they
started to fall off she was disappointed and ashamed.

“You go out, darling,” she said. “I think you are just making me
self-conscious.” Her face tied up. “There. That was better. I so want to
be a good wife and have this child without any foolishness. Please go
and get some breakfast, darling, and then come back. I won’t miss you.
Nurse is splendid to me.”

“You have plenty of time for breakfast,” the nurse said.

“I’ll go then. Good-by, sweet.”

“Good-by,” Catherine said, “and have a fine breakfast for me too.”

“Where can I get breakfast?” I asked the nurse.

“There’s a café down the street at the square,” she said. “It should be
open now.”

Outside it was getting light. I walked down the empty street to the
café. There was a light in the window. I went in and stood at the zinc
bar and an old man served me a glass of white wine and a brioche. The
brioche was yesterday’s. I dipped it in the wine and then drank a glass
of coffee.

“What do you do at this hour?” the old man asked.

“My wife is in labor at the hospital.”

“So. I wish you good luck.”

“Give me another glass of wine.”

He poured it from the bottle slopping it over a little so some ran down
on the zinc. I drank this glass, paid and went out. Outside along the
street were the refuse cans from the houses waiting for the collector. A
dog was nosing at one of the cans.

“What do you want?” I asked and looked in the can to see if there was
anything I could pull out for him; there was nothing on top but
coffee-grounds, dust and some dead flowers.

“There isn’t anything, dog,” I said. The dog crossed the street. I went
up the stairs in the hospital to the floor Catherine was on and down the
hall to her room. I knocked on the door. There was no answer. I opened
the door; the room was empty, except for Catherine’s bag on a chair and
her dressing-gown hanging on a hook on the wall. I went out and down the
hall, looking for somebody. I found a nurse.

“Where is Madame Henry?”

“A lady has just gone to the delivery room.”

“Where is it?”

“I will show you.”

She took me down to the end of the hall. The door of the room was partly
open. I could see Catherine lying on a table, covered by a sheet. The
nurse was on one side and the doctor stood on the other side of the
table beside some cylinders. The doctor held a rubber mask attached to a
tube in one hand.

“I will give you a gown and you can go in,” the nurse said. “Come in
here, please.”

She put a white gown on me and pinned it at the neck in back with a
safety pin.

“Now you can go in,” she said. I went into the room.

“Hello, darling,” Catherine said in a strained voice. “I’m not doing
much.”

“You are Mr. Henry?” the doctor asked.

“Yes. How is everything going, doctor?”

“Things are going very well,” the doctor said. “We came in here where it
is easy to give gas for the pains.”

“I want it now,” Catherine said. The doctor placed the rubber mask over
her face and turned a dial and I watched Catherine breathing deeply and
rapidly. Then she pushed the mask away. The doctor shut off the petcock.

“That wasn’t a very big one. I had a very big one a while ago. The
doctor made me go clear out, didn’t you, doctor?” Her voice was strange.
It rose on the word doctor.

The doctor smiled.

“I want it again,” Catherine said. She held the rubber tight to her face
and breathed fast. I heard her moaning a little. Then she pulled the
mask away and smiled.

“That was a big one,” she said. “That was a very big one. Don’t you
worry, darling. You go away. Go have another breakfast.”

“I’ll stay,” I said.



We had gone to the hospital about three o’clock in the morning. At noon
Catherine was still in the delivery room. The pains had slackened again.
She looked very tired and worn now but she was still cheerful.

“I’m not any good, darling,” she said. “I’m so sorry. I thought I would
do it very easily. Now—there’s one—” she reached out her hand for the
mask and held it over her face. The doctor moved the dial and watched
her. In a little while it was over.

“It wasn’t much,” Catherine said. She smiled. “I’m a fool about the gas.
It’s wonderful.”

“We’ll get some for the home,” I said.

“_There one comes_,” Catherine said quickly. The doctor turned the dial
and looked at his watch.

“What is the interval now?” I asked.

“About a minute.”

“Don’t you want lunch?”

“I will have something pretty soon,” he said.

“You must have something to eat, doctor,” Catherine said. “I’m so sorry
I go on so long. Couldn’t my husband give me the gas?”

“If you wish,” the doctor said. “You turn it to the numeral two.”

“I see,” I said. There was a marker on a dial that turned with a handle.

“_I want it now_,” Catherine said. She held the mask tight to her face.
I turned the dial to number two and when Catherine put down the mask I
turned it off. It was very good of the doctor to let me do something.

“Did you do it, darling?” Catherine asked. She stroked my wrist.

“Sure.”

“You’re so lovely.” She was a little drunk from the gas.

“I will eat from a tray in the next room,” the doctor said. “You can
call me any moment.” While the time passed I watched him eat, then,
after a while, I saw that he was lying down and smoking a cigarette.
Catherine was getting very tired.

“Do you think I’ll ever have this baby?” she asked.

“Yes, of course you will.”

“I try as hard as I can. I push down but it goes away. _There it comes.
Give it to me._”

At two o’clock I went out and had lunch. There were a few men in the
café sitting with coffee and glasses of kirsch or marc on the tables. I
sat down at a table. “Can I eat?” I asked the waiter.

“It is past time for lunch.”

“Isn’t there anything for all hours?”

“You can have _choucroute_.”

“Give me _choucroute_ and beer.”

“A demi or a bock?”

“A light demi.”

The waiter brought a dish of sauerkraut with a slice of ham over the top
and a sausage buried in the hot wine-soaked cabbage. I ate it and drank
the beer. I was very hungry. I watched the people at the tables in the
café. At one table they were playing cards. Two men at the table next me
were talking and smoking. The café was full of smoke. The zinc bar,
where I had breakfasted, had three people behind it now; the old man, a
plump woman in a black dress who sat behind a counter and kept track of
everything served to the tables, and a boy in an apron. I wondered how
many children the woman had and what it had been like.

When I was through with the _choucroute_ I went back to the hospital.
The street was all clean now. There were no refuse cans out. The day was
cloudy but the sun was trying to come through. I rode upstairs in the
elevator, stepped out and went down the hall to Catherine’s room, where
I had left my white gown. I put it on and pinned it in back at the neck.
I looked in the glass and saw myself looking like a fake doctor with a
beard. I went down the hall to the delivery room. The door was closed
and I knocked. No one answered so I turned the handle and went in. The
doctor sat by Catherine. The nurse was doing something at the other end
of the room.

“Here is your husband,” the doctor said.

“Oh, darling, I have the most wonderful doctor,” Catherine said in a
very strange voice. “He’s been telling me the most wonderful story and
when the pain came too badly he put me all the way out. He’s wonderful.
You’re wonderful, doctor.”

“You’re drunk,” I said.

“I know it,” Catherine said. “But you shouldn’t say it.” Then “_Give it
to me. Give it to me._” She clutched hold of the mask and breathed short
and deep, pantingly, making the respirator click. Then she gave a long
sigh and the doctor reached with his left hand and lifted away the mask.

“That was a very big one,” Catherine said. Her voice was very strange.
“I’m not going to die now, darling. I’m past where I was going to die.
Aren’t you glad?”

“Don’t you get in that place again.”

“I won’t. I’m not afraid of it though. I won’t die, darling.”

“You will not do any such foolishness,” the doctor said. “You would not
die and leave your husband.”

“Oh, no. I won’t die. I wouldn’t die. It’s silly to die. There it comes.
_Give it to me._”

After a while the doctor said, “You will go out, Mr. Henry, for a few
moments and I will make an examination.”

“He wants to see how I am doing,” Catherine said. “You can come back
afterward, darling, can’t he, doctor?”

“Yes,” said the doctor. “I will send word when he can come back.”

I went out the door and down the hall to the room where Catherine was to
be after the baby came. I sat in a chair there and looked at the room. I
had the paper in my coat that I had bought when I went out for lunch and
I read it. It was beginning to be dark outside and I turned the light on
to read. After a while I stopped reading and turned off the light and
watched it get dark outside. I wondered why the doctor did not send for
me. Maybe it was better I was away. He probably wanted me away for a
while. I looked at my watch. If he did not send for me in ten minutes I
would go down anyway.

Poor, poor dear Cat. And this was the price you paid for sleeping
together. This was the end of the trap. This was what people got for
loving each other. Thank God for gas, anyway. What must it have been
like before there were anæsthetics? Once it started, they were in the
mill-race. Catherine had a good time in the time of pregnancy. It wasn’t
bad. She was hardly ever sick. She was not awfully uncomfortable until
toward the last. So now they got her in the end. You never got away with
anything. Get away hell! It would have been the same if we had been
married fifty times. And what if she should die? She won’t die. People
don’t die in childbirth nowadays. That was what all husbands thought.
Yes, but what if she should die? She won’t die. She’s just having a bad
time. The initial labor is usually protracted. She’s only having a bad
time. Afterward we’d say what a bad time and Catherine would say it
wasn’t really so bad. But what if she should die? She can’t die. Yes,
but what if she should die? She can’t, I tell you. Don’t be a fool. It’s
just a bad time. It’s just nature giving her hell. It’s only the first
labor, which is almost always protracted. Yes, but what if she should
die? She can’t die. Why would she die? What reason is there for her to
die? There’s just a child that has to be born, the by-product of good
nights in Milan. It makes trouble and is born and then you look after it
and get fond of it maybe. But what if she should die? She won’t die. But
what if she should die? She won’t. She’s all right. But what if she
should die? She can’t die. But what if she should die? Hey, what about
that? What if she should die?

The doctor came into the room.

“How does it go, doctor?”

“It doesn’t go,” he said.

“What do you mean?”

“Just that. I made an examination—” He detailed the result of the
examination. “Since then I’ve waited to see. But it doesn’t go.”

“What do you advise?”

“There are two things. Either a high forceps delivery which can tear and
be quite dangerous besides being possibly bad for the child, and a
Cæsarean.”

“What is the danger of a Cæsarean?” What if she should die!

“It should be no greater than the danger of an ordinary delivery.”

“Would you do it yourself?”

“Yes. I would need possibly an hour to get things ready and to get the
people I would need. Perhaps a little less.”

“What do you think?”

“I would advise a Cæsarean operation. If it were my wife I would do a
Cæsarean.”

“What are the after effects?”

“There are none. There is only the scar.”

“What about infection?”

“The danger is not so great as in a high forceps delivery.”

“What if you just went on and did nothing?”

“You would have to do something eventually. Mrs. Henry is already losing
much of her strength. The sooner we operate now the safer.”

“Operate as soon as you can,” I said.

“I will go and give the instructions.”

I went into the delivery room. The nurse was with Catherine who lay on
the table, big under the sheet, looking very pale and tired.

“Did you tell him he could do it?” she asked.

“Yes.”

“Isn’t that grand. Now it will be all over in an hour. I’m almost done,
darling. I’m going all to pieces. _Please give me that._ It doesn’t
work. _Oh, it doesn’t work!_”

“Breathe deeply.”

“I am. Oh, it doesn’t work any more. It doesn’t work!”

“Get another cylinder,” I said to the nurse.

“That is a new cylinder.”

“I’m just a fool, darling,” Catherine said. “But it doesn’t work any
more.” She began to cry. “Oh, I wanted so to have this baby and not make
trouble, and now I’m all done and all gone to pieces and it doesn’t
work. Oh, darling, it doesn’t work at all. I don’t care if I die if it
will only stop. Oh, please, darling, please make it stop. _There it
comes. Oh Oh Oh!_” She breathed sobbingly in the mask. “It doesn’t work.
It doesn’t work. It doesn’t work. Don’t mind me, darling. Please don’t
cry. Don’t mind me. I’m just gone all to pieces. You poor sweet. I love
you so and I’ll be good again. I’ll be good this time. _Can’t they give
me something?_ If they could only give me something.”

“I’ll make it work. I’ll turn it all the way.”

“Give it to me now.”

I turned the dial all the way and as she breathed hard and deep her hand
relaxed on the mask. I shut off the gas and lifted the mask. She came
back from a long way away.

“That was lovely, darling. Oh, you’re so good to me.

“You be brave, because I can’t do that all the time. It might kill you.”

“I’m not brave any more, darling. I’m all broken. They’ve broken me. I
know it now.”

“Everybody is that way.”

“But it’s awful. They just keep it up till they break you.”

“In an hour it will be over.”

“Isn’t that lovely? Darling, I won’t die, will I?”

“No. I promise you won’t.”

“Because I don’t want to die and leave you, but I get so tired of it and
I feel I’m going to die.”

“Nonsense. Everybody feels that.”

“Sometimes I know I’m going to die.”

“You won’t. You can’t.”

“But what if I should?”

“I won’t let you.”

“Give it to me quick. _Give it to me!_”

Then afterward, “I won’t die. I won’t let myself die.”

“Of course you won’t.”

“You’ll stay with me?”

“Not to watch it.”

“No, just to be there.”

“Sure. I’ll be there all the time.”

“You’re so good to me. There, give it to me. Give me some more. _It’s
not working!_”

I turned the dial to three and then four. I wished the doctor would come
back. I was afraid of the numbers above two.



Finally a new doctor came in with two nurses and they lifted Catherine
onto a wheeled stretcher and we started down the hall. The stretcher
went rapidly down the hall and into the elevator where every one had to
crowd against the wall to make room; then up, then an open door and out
of the elevator and down the hall on rubber wheels to the operating
room. I did not recognize the doctor with his cap and mask on. There was
another doctor and more nurses.

“_They’ve got to give me something_,” Catherine said. “_They’ve got to
give me something._ Oh please, doctor, give me enough to do some good!”

One of the doctors put a mask over her face and I looked through the
door and saw the bright small amphitheatre of the operating room.

“You can go in the other door and sit up there,” a nurse said to me.
There were benches behind a rail that looked down on the white table and
the lights. I looked at Catherine. The mask was over her face and she
was quiet now. They wheeled the stretcher forward. I turned away and
walked down the hall. Two nurses were hurrying toward the entrance to
the gallery.

“It’s a Cæsarean,” one said. “They’re going to do a Cæsarean.”

The other one laughed, “We’re just in time. Aren’t we lucky?” They went
in the door that led to the gallery.

Another nurse came along. She was hurrying too.

“You go right in there. Go right in,” she said.

“I’m staying outside.”

She hurried in. I walked up and down the hall. I was afraid to go in. I
looked out the window. It was dark but in the light from the window I
could see it was raining. I went into a room at the far end of the hall
and looked at the labels on bottles in a glass case. Then I came out and
stood in the empty hall and watched the door of the operating room.

A doctor came out followed by a nurse. He held something in his two
hands that looked like a freshly skinned rabbit and hurried across the
corridor with it and in through another door. I went down to the door he
had gone into and found them in the room doing things to a new-born
child. The doctor held him up for me to see. He held him by the heels
and slapped him.

“Is he all right?”

“He’s magnificent. He’ll weigh five kilos.”

I had no feeling for him. He did not seem to have anything to do with
me. I felt no feeling of fatherhood.

“Aren’t you proud of your son?” the nurse asked. They were washing him
and wrapping him in something. I saw the little dark face and dark hand,
but I did not see him move or hear him cry. The doctor was doing
something to him again. He looked upset.

“No,” I said. “He nearly killed his mother.”

“It isn’t the little darling’s fault. Didn’t you want a boy?”

“No,” I said. The doctor was busy with him. He held him up by the feet
and slapped him. I did not wait to see it. I went out in the hall. I
could go in now and see. I went in the door and a little way down the
gallery. The nurses who were sitting at the rail motioned for me to come
down where they were. I shook my head. I could see enough where I was.

I thought Catherine was dead. She looked dead. Her face was gray, the
part of it that I could see. Down below, under the light, the doctor was
sewing up the great long, forcep-spread, thick-edged, wound. Another
doctor in a mask gave the anæsthetic. Two nurses in masks handed things.
It looked like a drawing of the Inquisition. I knew as I watched I could
have watched it all, but I was glad I hadn’t. I do not think I could
have watched them cut, but I watched the wound closed into a high welted
ridge with quick skilful-looking stitches like a cobbler’s, and was
glad. When the wound was closed I went out into the hall and walked up
and down again. After a while the doctor came out.

“How is she?”

“She is all right. Did you watch?”

He looked tired.

“I saw you sew up. The incision looked very long.”

“You thought so?”

“Yes. Will that scar flatten out?”

“Oh, yes.”

After a while they brought out the wheeled stretcher and took it very
rapidly down the hallway to the elevator. I went along beside it.
Catherine was moaning. Downstairs they put her in the bed in her room. I
sat in a chair at the foot of the bed. There was a nurse in the room. I
got up and stood by the bed. It was dark in the room. Catherine put out
her hand, “Hello, darling,” she said. Her voice was very weak and tired.

“Hello, you sweet.”

“What sort of baby was it?”

“Sh—don’t talk,” the nurse said.

“A boy. He’s long and wide and dark.”

“Is he all right?”

“Yes,” I said. “He’s fine.”

I saw the nurse look at me strangely.

“I’m awfully tired,” Catherine said. “And I hurt like hell. Are you all
right, darling?”

“I’m fine. Don’t talk.”

“You were lovely to me. Oh, darling, I hurt dreadfully. What does he
look like?”

“He looks like a skinned rabbit with a puckered-up old-man’s face.”

“You must go out,” the nurse said. “Madame Henry must not talk.”

“I’ll be outside,” I said.

“Go and get something to eat.”

“No. I’ll be outside.” I kissed Catherine. She was very gray and weak
and tired.

“May I speak to you?” I said to the nurse. She came out in the hall with
me. I walked a little way down the hall.

“What’s the matter with the baby?” I asked.

“Didn’t you know?”

“No.”

“He wasn’t alive.”

“He was dead?”

“They couldn’t start him breathing. The cord was caught around his neck
or something.”

“So he’s dead.”

“Yes. It’s such a shame. He was such a fine big boy. I thought you
knew.”

“No,” I said. “You better go back in with Madame.”

I sat down on the chair in front of a table where there were nurses’
reports hung on clips at the side and looked out of the window. I could
see nothing but the dark and the rain falling across the light from the
window. So that was it. The baby was dead. That was why the doctor
looked so tired. But why had they acted the way they did in the room
with him? They supposed he would come around and start breathing
probably. I had no religion but I knew he ought to have been baptized.
But what if he never breathed at all. He hadn’t. He had never been
alive. Except in Catherine. I’d felt him kick there often enough. But I
hadn’t for a week. Maybe he was choked all the time. Poor little kid. I
wished the hell I’d been choked like that. No I didn’t. Still there
would not be all this dying to go through. Now Catherine would die. That
was what you did. You died. You did not know what it was about. You
never had time to learn. They threw you in and told you the rules and
the first time they caught you off base they killed you. Or they killed
you gratuitously like Aymo. Or gave you the syphilis like Rinaldo. But
they killed you in the end. You could count on that. Stay around and
they would kill you.

Once in camp I put a log on top of the fire and it was full of ants. As
it commenced to burn, the ants swarmed out and went first toward the
centre where the fire was; then turned back and ran toward the end. When
there were enough on the end they fell off into the fire. Some got out,
their bodies burnt and flattened, and went off not knowing where they
were going. But most of them went toward the fire and then back toward
the end and swarmed on the cool end and finally fell off into the fire.
I remember thinking at the time that it was the end of the world and a
splendid chance to be a messiah and lift the log off the fire and throw
it out where the ants could get off onto the ground. But I did not do
anything but throw a tin cup of water on the log, so that I would have
the cup empty to put whiskey in before I added water to it. I think the
cup of water on the burning log only steamed the ants.

So now I sat out in the hall and waited to hear how Catherine was. The
nurse did not come out, so after a while I went to the door and opened
it very softly and looked in. I could not see at first because there was
a bright light in the hall and it was dark in the room. Then I saw the
nurse sitting by the bed and Catherine’s head on a pillow, and she all
flat under the sheet. The nurse put her finger to her lips, then stood
up and came to the door.

“How is she?” I asked.

“She’s all right,” the nurse said. “You should go and have your supper
and then come back if you wish.”

I went down the hall and then down the stairs and out the door of the
hospital and down the dark street in the rain to the café. It was
brightly lighted inside and there were many people at the tables. I did
not see a place to sit, and a waiter came up to me and took my wet coat
and hat and showed me a place at a table across from an elderly man who
was drinking beer and reading the evening paper. I sat down and asked
the waiter what the _plat du jour_ was.

“Veal stew—but it is finished.”

“What can I have to eat?”

“Ham and eggs, eggs with cheese, or _choucroute_.”

“I had _choucroute_ this noon,” I said.

“That’s true,” he said. “That’s true. You ate _choucroute_ this noon.”
He was a middle-aged man with a bald top to his head and his hair
slicked over it. He had a kind face.

“What do you want? Ham and eggs or eggs with cheese?”

“Ham and eggs,” I said, “and beer.”

“A demi-blonde?”

“Yes,” I said.

“I remembered,” he said. “You took a demi-blonde this noon.”

I ate the ham and eggs and drank the beer. The ham and eggs were in a
round dish—the ham underneath and the eggs on top. It was very hot and
at the first mouthful I had to take a drink of beer to cool my mouth. I
was hungry and I asked the waiter for another order. I drank several
glasses of beer. I was not thinking at all but read the paper of the man
opposite me. It was about the break through on the British front. When
he realized I was reading the back of his paper he folded it over. I
thought of asking the waiter for a paper, but I could not concentrate.
It was hot in the café and the air was bad. Many of the people at the
tables knew one another. There were several card games going on. The
waiters were busy bringing drinks from the bar to the tables. Two men
came in and could find no place to sit. They stood opposite the table
where I was. I ordered another beer. I was not ready to leave yet. It
was too soon to go back to the hospital. I tried not to think and to be
perfectly calm. The men stood around but no one was leaving, so they
went out. I drank another beer. There was quite a pile of saucers now on
the table in front of me. The man opposite me had taken off his
spectacles, put them away in a case, folded his paper and put it in his
pocket and now sat holding his liqueur glass and looking out at the
room. Suddenly I knew I had to get back. I called the waiter, paid the
reckoning, got into my coat, put on my hat and started out the door. I
walked through the rain up to the hospital.

Upstairs I met the nurse coming down the hall.

“I just called you at the hotel,” she said. Something dropped inside me.

“What is wrong?”

“Mrs. Henry has had a hemorrhage.”

“Can I go in?”

“No, not yet. The doctor is with her.”

“Is it dangerous?”

“It is very dangerous.” The nurse went into the room and shut the door.
I sat outside in the hall. Everything was gone inside of me. I did not
think. I could not think. I knew she was going to die and I prayed that
she would not. Don’t let her die. Oh, God, please don’t let her die.
I’ll do anything for you if you won’t let her die. Please, please,
please, dear God, don’t let her die. Dear God, don’t let her die.
Please, please, please don’t let her die. God please make her not die.
I’ll do anything you say if you don’t let her die. You took the baby but
don’t let her die. That was all right but don’t let her die. Please,
please, dear God, don’t let her die.

The nurse opened the door and motioned with her finger for me to come. I
followed her into the room. Catherine did not look up when I came in. I
went over to the side of the bed. The doctor was standing by the bed on
the opposite side. Catherine looked at me and smiled. I bent down over
the bed and started to cry.

“Poor darling,” Catherine said very softly. She looked gray.

“You’re all right, Cat,” I said. “You’re going to be all right.”

“I’m going to die,” she said; then waited and said, “I hate it.”

I took her hand.

“Don’t touch me,” she said. I let go of her hand. She smiled. “Poor
darling. You touch me all you want.”

“You’ll be all right, Cat. I know you’ll be all right.”

“I meant to write you a letter to have if anything happened, but I
didn’t do it.”

“Do you want me to get a priest or any one to come and see you?”

“Just you,” she said. Then a little later, “I’m not afraid. I just hate
it.”

“You must not talk so much,” the doctor said.

“All right,” Catherine said.

“Do you want me to do anything, Cat? Can I get you anything?”

Catherine smiled, “No.” Then a little later, “You won’t do our things
with another girl, or say the same things, will you?”

“Never.”

“I want you to have girls, though.”

“I don’t want them.”

“You are talking too much,” the doctor said. “Mr. Henry must go out. He
can come back again later. You are not going to die. You must not be
silly.”

“All right,” Catherine said. “I’ll come and stay with you nights,” she
said. It was very hard for her to talk.

“Please go out of the room,” the doctor said. “You cannot talk.”
Catherine winked at me, her face gray. “I’ll be right outside,” I said.

“Don’t worry, darling,” Catherine said. “I’m not a bit afraid. It’s just
a dirty trick.”

“You dear, brave sweet.”

I waited outside in the hall. I waited a long time. The nurse came to
the door and came over to me. “I’m afraid Mrs. Henry is very ill,” she
said. “I’m afraid for her.”

“Is she dead?”

“No, but she is unconscious.”

It seems she had one hemorrhage after another. They couldn’t stop it. I
went into the room and stayed with Catherine until she died. She was
unconscious all the time, and it did not take her very long to die.



Outside the room, in the hall, I spoke to the doctor, “is there anything
I can do to-night?”

“No. There is nothing to do. Can I take you to your hotel?”

“No, thank you. I am going to stay here a while.”

“I know there is nothing to say. I cannot tell you——”

“No,” I said. “There’s nothing to say.”

“Good-night,” he said. “I cannot take you to your hotel?”

“No, thank you.”

“It was the only thing to do,” he said. “The operation proved——”

“I do not want to talk about it,” I said.

“I would like to take you to your hotel.”

“No, thank you.”

He went down the hall. I went to the door of the room.

“You can’t come in now,” one of the nurses said.

“Yes I can,” I said.

“You can’t come in yet.”

“You get out,” I said. “The other one too.”

But after I had got them out and shut the door and turned off the light
it wasn’t any good. It was like saying good-by to a statue. After a
while I went out and left the hospital and walked back to the hotel in
the rain.

                                THE END




                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES

Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected. Where multiple
spellings occur, majority use has been employed.

Punctuation has been maintained except where obvious printer errors
occur.

[The end of _A Farewell to Arms_ by Ernest Hemingway]


Chapter I

They started two hours before daylight, and at first, it was not
necessary to break the ice across the canal as other boats had gone on
ahead.  In each boat, in the darkness, so you could not see, but only
hear him, the poler stood in the stern, with his long oar.  The shooter
sat on a shooting stool fastened to the top of a box that contained his
lunch and shells, and the shooter's two, or more, guns were propped
against the load of wooden decoys.  Somewhere, in each boat, there was
a sack with one or two live mallard hens, or a hen and a drake, and in
each boat there was a dog who shifted and shivered uneasily at the
sound of the wings of the ducks that passed overhead in the darkness.

Four of the boats went on up the main canal towards the big lagoon to
the north.  A fifth boat had already turned off into a side canal.
Now, the sixth boat turned south into a shallow lagoon, and there was
no broken water.

It was all ice, new-frozen during the sudden, windless cold of the
night.  It was rubbery and bending against the thrust of the boatman's
oar.  Then it would break as sharply as a pane of glass, but the boat
made little forward progress.

'Give me an oar,' the shooter in the sixth boat said.  He stood up and
braced himself carefully.  He could hear the ducks passing in the
darkness, and feel the restless lurching of the dog.  To the north he
heard the sound of breaking ice from the other boats.

'Be careful,' the poler in the stern said.  'Don't tip the boat over.'

'I am a boatman, too,' the shooter said.

He took the long oar the boatman handed him and reversed it so he could
hold it by the blade.  Holding the blade he reached forward and punched
the handle through the ice.  He felt the firm bottom of the shallow
lagoon, put his weight on the top of the wide oar-blade, and holding
with both hands and, first pulling, then shoving, until the pole-hold
was well to the stern, he drove the boat ahead to break the ice.  The
ice broke like sheets of plate glass as the boat drove into it, and
onto it, and astern the boatman shoved them ahead into the broken
passage.

After a while, the shooter, who was working hard and steadily and
sweating in his heavy clothes, asked the boatman, 'Where is the
shooting barrel?'

'Off there to the left.  In the middle of the next bay.'

'Should I turn for it now?'

'As you wish.'

'What do you mean, as I wish?  You know the water.  Is there water to
carry us there?'

'The tide is low.  Who knows?'

'It will be daylight before we get there if we don't hurry.'

The boatman did not answer.

All right, you surly jerk, the shooter thought to himself.  We are
going to get there.  We've made two-thirds of the way now and if you
are worried about having to work to break ice to pick up birds, that is
altogether too bad.

'Get your back in it, jerk,' he said in English.

'What?' the boatman asked in Italian.

'I said let's go.  It's going to be light.'

It was daylight before they reached the oaken-staved hogshead sunk in
the bottom of the lagoon.  It was surrounded by a sloping rim of earth
that had been planted with sedge and grass, and the shooter swung
carefully up onto this, feeling the frozen grasses break as he stepped
on them.  The boatman lifted the combination shooting stool and shell
box out of the boat and handed it to the shooter, who leaned over and
placed it in the bottom of the big barrel.

The shooter, wearing his hip boots and an old combat jacket, with a
patch on the left shoulder that no one understood, and with the slight
light places on the straps, where stars had been removed, climbed down
into the barrel and the boatman handed him his two guns.

He placed them against the wall of the barrel and hung his other shell
bag between them, hanging it on two hooks built into the wall of the
sunken barrel.  Then he leaned the guns against each side of the shell
bag.

'Is there water?' he asked the boatman.

'No water,' the boatman said.

'Can you drink the lagoon water?'

'No.  It is unhealthy.'

The shooter was thirsty from the hard work of breaking the ice and
driving the boat in and he felt his anger rise, and then held it, and
said, 'Can I help you in the boat to break ice to put out the decoys?'

'No,' the boatman said and shoved the boat savagely out on to the thin
sheet ice that cracked and ripped as the boat drove up on to it.  The
boatman commenced smashing at the ice with the blade of his oar and
then started tossing decoys out to the side and behind him.

He's in a beautiful mood, the shooter thought.  He's a big brute, too.
I worked like a horse coming out here.  He just pulled his weight and
that's all.  What the hell is eating him?  This is his trade, isn't it?

He arranged the shooting stool so he would have the maximum swing to
left and right, opened a box of shells, and filled his pockets and
opened another of the boxes of shells in the shell bag so he could
reach into it easily.  In front of him, where the lagoon lay glazed in
the first light, was the black boat and the tall, heavily built boatman
smashing with his oar at the ice and tossing decoys overboard as though
he were ridding himself of something obscene.

It was getting lighter now and the shooter could see the low line of
the near point across the lagoon.  Beyond that point he knew there were
two other shooting posts and far beyond it there was more marsh and
then the open sea.  He loaded both his guns and checked the position of
the boat that was putting out decoys.

From behind him, he heard the incoming whisper of wings and he
crouched, took hold of his right-hand gun with his right hand as he
looked up from under the rim of the barrel, then stood to shoot at the
two ducks that were dropping down, their wings set to brake, coming
down dark to the grey dim sky, slanting towards the decoys.

His head low, he swung the gun on a long slant, down, well and ahead of
the second duck, then without looking at the result of his shot he
raised the gun smoothly, up, up ahead and to the left of the other duck
that was climbing to the left and as he pulled, saw it fold in flight
and drop among the decoys in the broken ice.  He looked to his right
and saw the first duck a black patch on the same ice.  He knew he had
shot carefully on the first duck, far to the right of where the boat
was and on the second, high out and to the left, letting the duck climb
far up and to the left to be sure the boat was out of any line of fire.
It was a lovely double, shot exactly as he should have shot, with
complete consideration and respect for the position of the boat and he
felt very good as he reloaded.

'Listen,' the man in the boat called.  'Don't shoot towards the boat.'

I'll be a sad son of a bitch, the shooter said to himself.  I will
indeed.

'Get your decoys out,' he called to the man in the boat.  'But get them
out fast.  I won't shoot until they are all out.  Except straight
overhead.'

The man in the boat said nothing that could be heard.

I can't figure it, the shooter thought to himself.  He knows the game.
He knows I split the work, or more, coming out.  I never shot a safer
or more careful duck in my life than that.  What's the matter with him?
I offered to put the dekes out with him.  The hell with him.

Out on the right now, the boatman was still chopping angrily at the ice
and tossing out the wooden decoys in a hatred that showed in every move
he made.

Don't let him spoil it, the shooter told himself.  There won't be much
shooting with this ice unless the sun should melt it later on, You
probably will only have a few birds, so don't let him spoil it for you.
You don't know how many more times you will shoot ducks and do not let
anything spoil it for you.

He watched the sky lightening beyond the long point of marsh and
turning in the sunken barrel, he looked out across the frozen lagoon
and the marsh and saw the snow-covered mountains a long way off.  Low
as he was, no foot-hills showed and the mountains rose abruptly from
the plain.  As he looked towards the mountains he could feel a breeze
on his face and he knew, then, the wind would come from there, rising
with the sun and that some birds would surely come flying in from the
sea when the wind disturbed them.

The boatman had finished putting out the decoys.  They were in two
bunches, one straight ahead and to the left towards where the sun would
rise and the other to the shooter's right.  Now he dropped over the hen
mallard with her string and anchor and the calling duck bobbed her head
under water and raising and dipping her head, splashed water on to her
back.

'Don't you think it would be good to break more ice around the edges?'
the shooter called to the boatman.  'There's not much water to attract
them.'

The boatman said nothing but commenced to smash at the jagged perimeter
of ice with his oar.  This ice breaking was unnecessary and the boatman
knew it.  But the shooter did not know it and he thought, I do not
understand him but I must not let him ruin it.  I must keep it entire
and not let him do it.  Every time you shoot now can be the last shoot
and no stupid son of a bitch should be allowed to ruin it.  Keep your
temper, boy, he told himself.




Chapter II

But he was not a boy.  He was fifty and a Colonel of Infantry in the
Army of the United States and to pass a physical examination that he
had to take the day before he came down to Venice for this shoot, he
had taken enough mannitol hexanitrate to, well he did not quite know
what to--to pass, he said to himself.

The surgeon had been quite sceptical.  But he noted the readings after
taking them twice.

'You know, Dick,' he said.  'It isn't indicated; in fact it is
definitely contra-indicated in increased intra-colour and intra-cranial
pressure.'

'I don't know what you are talking about,' the shooter, who was not a
shooter, then, except potentially and was a Colonel of Infantry in the
Army of the United States, reduced from being a general officer, said.

'I have known you a long time, Colonel.  Or maybe it just seems a long
time,' the surgeon told him.

'It's been a long time,' the Colonel said.

'We sound like song writers,' the surgeon said.  'But don't you ever
run into anything, or let any sparks strike you, when you're really
souped up on nitroglycerin.  They ought to make you drag a chain like a
high-octane truck.'

'Wasn't my cardiograph O.K.?' the Colonel asked.

'Your cardiograph was wonderful, Colonel.  It could have been that of a
man of twenty-five.  It might have been that of a boy of nineteen.'

'Then what are you talking about?' the Colonel asked.

That much mannitol hexanitrate produced a certain amount of nausea,
sometimes, and he was anxious for the interview to terminate.  He was
also anxious to lie down and take a seconal.  I ought to write the
manual of minor tactics for the heavy pressure platoon, he thought.
Wish I could tell him that.  Why don't I just throw myself on the mercy
of the court?  You never do, he told himself.  You always plead them
non-guilty.

'How many times have you been hit in the head?' the surgeon asked him.

'You know,' the Colonel told him.  'It's in my 201.'

'How many times have you been hit _on_ the head?'

'Oh Christ.'  Then he said.  'You are asking for the army or as my
physician?'

'As your physician.  You didn't think I'd try to wind your clock, did
you?'

'No, Wes.  I'm sorry.  Just what was it you wanted to know?'

'Concussions.'

'Real ones?'

'Any time you were cold or couldn't remember afterwards.'

'Maybe ten,' the Colonel said.  'Counting polo.  Give or take three.'

'You poor old son of a bitch,' the surgeon said.  'Colonel, sir,' he
added.

'Can I go now?' the Colonel asked.

'Yes, sir,' the surgeon said.  'You're in good shape.'

'Thanks,' the Colonel said.  'Want to go on a duck shoot down in the
marshes at the mouth of the Tagliamento?  Wonderful shoot.  Some nice
Italian kids I met up at Cortina own it.'

'Is that where they shoot coots?'

'No.  They shoot real ducks at this one.  Good kids.  Good shoot.  Real
ducks.  Mallard, pin-tail, widgeon.  Some geese.  Just as good as at
home when we were kids.'

'I was kids in 'twenty-nine and 'thirty.'

'That's the first mean thing I ever heard you say.'

'I didn't mean it like that.  I just meant I didn't remember when duck
shooting was good.  I'm a city boy, too.'

'That's the only God-damn trouble with you, too.  I never saw a city
boy yet that was worth a damn.'

'You don't mean that, do you, Colonel?'

'Of course not.  You know damn well I don't.'

'You're in good shape, Colonel,' the surgeon said.  'I'm sorry I can't
go on the shoot.  I can't even shoot.'

'Hell,' said the Colonel.  'That doesn't make any difference.  Neither
can anybody else in this army.  I'd like to have you around.'

'I'll give you something else to back up what you're using.'

'Is there anything?'

'Not really.  They're working on stuff, though.'

'Let 'em work,' the Colonel said.

'I think that's a laudable attitude, sir.'

'Go to hell,' the Colonel said.  'You sure you don't want to go?'

'I get my ducks at Longchamps on Madison Avenue,' the surgeon said.
'It's air-conditioned in the summer and it's warm in the winter and I
don't have to get up before first light and wear long-horned underwear.'

'All right, City Boy.  You'll never know.'

'I never wanted to know,' the surgeon said.  'You're in good shape,
Colonel, sir.'

'Thanks,' said the Colonel and went out.




Chapter III

That was the day before yesterday.  Yesterday he had driven down from
Trieste to Venice along the old road that ran from Montfalcone to
Latisana and across the flat country.  He had a good driver and he
relaxed completely in the front seat of the car and looked out at all
this country he had known when he was a boy.

It looks quite differently now, he thought.  I suppose it is because
the distances are all changed.  Everything is much smaller when you are
older.  Then, too, the roads are better now and there is no dust.  The
only times I used to ride through it was in a camion.  The rest of the
times we walked.  I suppose what I looked for then, was patches of
shade when we fell out, and wells in farmyards.  And ditches, too, he
thought.  I certainly looked for plenty of ditches.

They made a curve and crossed the Tagliamento on a temporary bridge.
It was green along the banks and men were fishing along the far shore
where it ran deep.  The blown bridge was being repaired with a snarl of
riveting hammers, and eight hundred yards away the smashed buildings
and outbuildings of what was now a ruined country house once built by
Longhena showed where the mediums had dropped their loads.

'Look at it,' the driver said.  'In this country you find a bridge or a
railway station.  Then go half a mile from it in any direction and you
find it like that.'

'I guess the lesson is,' the Colonel said, 'don't ever build yourself a
country house, or a church, or hire Giotto to paint you any frescoes,
if you've got a church, eight hundred yards away from any bridge.'

'I knew there must be a lesson in it, sir,' the driver said.

They were past the ruined villa now and on to the straight road with
the willows growing by the ditches still dark with winter, and the
fields full of mulberry trees.  Ahead a man was pedalling a bicycle and
using both his hands to read a paper.

'If there are heavies the lesson ought to say a mile,' the driver said.
'Would that be about right, sir?'

'If it's guided missiles,' the Colonel said.  'Better make it two
hundred and fifty miles.  Better give that cyclist some horn.'

The driver did, and the man moved over to the side of the road without
either looking up or touching his handlebars.  As they passed him, the
Colonel tried to see what paper he was reading, but it was folded over.

'I guess a man would do better now not to build himself a fine house or
a church, or to get who did you say it was to paint frescoes?'

'Giotto, I said.  But it could be Piero della Francesca or Mantegna.
Could be Michelangelo.'

'Do you know a lot about painters, sir?' the driver asked.

They were on a straight stretch of road now and were making time so
that one farm blended, almost blurred, into another farm and you could
only see what was far ahead and moving towards you.  Lateral vision was
just a condensation of flat, low country in the winter.  I'm not sure I
like speed, the Colonel thought.  Brueghel would have been in a hell of
a shape if he had to look at the country like this.

'Painters?' he answered the driver.  'I know quite a little about them,
Burnham.'

'I'm Jackson, sir.  Burnham's up at the rest centre at Cortina.  That's
a fine place, sir.'

'I'm getting stupid,' the Colonel said.  'Excuse me, Jackson.  It is a
fine place.  Good chow.  Well run.  Nobody bothers you.'

'Yes, sir,' Jackson agreed.  'Now the reason I asked you about
painters, is these madonnas.  I thought I ought to see some painting so
I went to that big place in Florence.'

'The Uffizi?  The Pitti?'

'Whatever they call it.  The biggest one.  And I kept looking at those
paintings until madonnas started to run out of my ears.  I tell you,
Colonel, sir, a man who hasn't been checked out on this painting can
only see just about so many madonnas and it gets him.  You know my
theory?  You know how crazy they are about bambinis and the less they
got to eat the more bambinis they got and that they have coming?  Well,
I think these painters were probably big bambini lovers like all
Italians.  I don't know these ones you mentioned just now, so I don't
include them in my theory and you'll put me straight anyway.  But it
looks to me like these madonnas, that I really saw plenty of, sir, it
looks to me like these just straight ordinary madonna painters were
sort of a manifest, say, of this whole bambini business, if you
understand what I mean.'

'Plus the fact that they were restricted to religious subjects.'

'Yes, sir.  Then you think there is something to my theory?'

'Sure.  I think it is a little more complicated, though.'

'Naturally, sir.  It's just my preliminary theory.'

'Do you have any other theories on art, Jackson?'

'No, sir.  That bambini theory is as far as I've thought it through.
What I wish is, though, they would paint some good pictures of that
high country up around the rest centre at Cortina.'

'Titian came from up there,' the Colonel said.  'At least they say he
did.  I went down the valley and saw the house where he was supposed to
be born.'

'Was it much of a place, sir?'

'Not so much.'

'Well, if he painted any pictures of that country up around there, with
those sunset colour rocks and the pines and the snow and all the
pointed steeples----'

'_Campaniles_,' the Colonel said.  'Like that one ahead at Ceggia.  It
means bell tower.'

'Well, if he painted any really good pictures of that country I'd sure
as hell like to trade him out of some of them.'

'He painted some wonderful women,' the Colonel said.

'If I had a joint or a roadhouse or some sort of an inn, say, I could
use one of those,' the driver said.  'But if I brought home a picture
of some woman, my old woman would run me from Rawlins to Buffalo.  I'd
be lucky if I _got_ to Buffalo.'

'You could give it to the local museum.'

'All they got in the local museum is arrow heads, war bonnets, scalping
knives, different scalps, petrified fish, pipes of peace, photographs
of Liver Eating Johnston, and the skin of some bad man that they hanged
him and some doctor skinned him out.  One of those women pictures would
be out of place there.'

'See that next _campanile_ down there across the plain?' the Colonel
said.  'I'll show you a place down there where we used to fight when I
was a kid.'

'Did you fight here, too, sir?'

'Yeah,' the Colonel said.

'Who had Trieste in that war?'

'The Krauts.  The Austrians, I mean.'

'Did we ever get it?'

'Not till the end when it was over.'

'Who had Florence and Rome?'

'We did.'

'Well, I guess you weren't so damned bad off then.'

'Sir,' the Colonel said gently.

'I'm sorry, sir,' the driver said quickly.  'I was in the Thirty-Sixth
Division, sir.'

'I've seen the patch.'

'I was thinking about the Rapido, sir, I didn't mean to be insolent or
lacking in respect.'

'You weren't,' the Colonel said.  'You were just thinking about the
Rapido.  Listen, Jackson, everybody who's soldiered a long time has had
their Rapidos and more than one.'

'I couldn't take more than one, sir.'

The car went through the cheerful town of San Dona di Piave.  It was
built up and new, but no more ugly than a middle western town, and it
was as prosperous and as cheery as Fossalta, just up the river, is
miserable and gloomy, the Colonel thought.  Did Fossalta never get over
the first war?  I never saw it before it was smacked, he thought.  They
shelled it badly before the big fifteenth of June offensive in
'eighteen.  Then we shelled it really badly before we re-took it.  He
remembered how the attack had taken off from Monastier, gone through
Fornace, and on this winter day he remembered how it had been that
summer.

A few weeks ago he had gone through Fossalta and had gone out along the
sunken road to find the place where he had been hit, out on the river
bank.  It was easy to find because of the bend of the river, and where
the heavy machine gun post had been the crater was smoothly grassed.
It had been cropped, by sheep or goats, until it looked like a designed
depression in a golf course.  The river was slow and a muddy blue here,
with reeds along the edges, and the Colonel, no one being in sight,
squatted low, and looking across the river from the bank where you
could never show your head in daylight, relieved himself in the exact
place where he had determined, by triangulation, that he had been badly
wounded thirty years before.

'A poor effort,' he said aloud to the river and the river bank that
were heavy with autumn quiet and wet from the fall rains.  'But my own.

He stood up and looked around.  There was no one in sight and he had
left the car down the sunken road in front of the last and saddest
rebuilt house in Fossalta.

'Now I'll complete the monument,' he said to no one but the dead, and
he took an old Solingen clasp knife, such as German poachers carry,
from his pocket.  It locked on opening and, twirling it, he dug a neat
hole in the moist earth.  He cleaned the knife on his right combat boot
and then inserted a brown ten thousand lira note in the hole and tamped
it down and put the grass that he had cored out over it.

'That is twenty years at five hundred lira a year for the Medaglia
d'Argento al Valore Militare.  The V.C. carries ten guineas, I believe.
The D.S.C. is non-productive.  The Silver Star is free.  I'll keep the
change,' he said.

It's fine now, he thought.  It has merde, money, blood; look how that
grass grows; and the iron's in the earth along with Gino's leg, both of
Randolfo's legs and my right knee-cap.  It's a wonderful monument.  It
has everything.  Fertility, money, blood and iron.  Sounds like a
nation.  Where fertility, money, blood and iron is; there is the
fatherland.  We need coal though.  We ought to get some coal.

Then he looked across the river to the rebuilt white house that had
once been rubble, and he spat in the river.  It was a long spit and he
just made it.

'I couldn't spit that night nor afterwards for a long time,' he said.
'But I spit good now for a man who doesn't chew.'

He walked slowly back to where the car was parked.  The driver was
asleep.

'Wake up, son,' he had said.  'Turn her around and take that road
towards Treviso.  We don't need a map on this part.  I'll give you the
turns.'




Chapter IV

Now, on his way into Venice, keeping strictly controlled and unthinking
his great need to be there, the big Buick cleared the last of San Dona
and came up on to the bridge over the Piave.

They crossed the bridge and were on the Italian side of the river and
he saw the old sunken road again.  It was as smooth and undistinguished
now, as it was all along the river.  But he could see the old
positions.  And now, along each side of the straight, flat,
canal-bordered road they were making time on were the willows of the
two canals that had contained the dead.  There had been a great killing
at the last of the offensive and someone, to clear the river bank
positions and the road in the hot weather, had ordered the dead thrown
into the canals.  Unfortunately, the canal gates were still in the
Austrians' hands down the river, and they were closed.

So there was little movement to the water, and the dead had stayed,
there a long time, floating and bloating face up and face down
regardless of nationality until they had attained colossal proportions.
Finally, after organization had been established, labour troops hauled
them out at night and buried them close to the road.  The Colonel
looked for added greenness close to the road but could not note any.
However, there were many ducks and geese in the canals, and men were
fishing in them all along the road.

They dug them all up anyway, the Colonel thought, and buried them in
that big _ossario_ up by Nervesa.

'We fought along here when I was a kid,' the Colonel told the driver.

'It's a God-damn flat country to fight in,' the driver said.  'Did you
hold that river?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'We held it and lost it and took it back
again.'

'There isn't a contour here as far as you can see.'

'That was the trouble,' the Colonel said.  'You had to use contours you
couldn't see, they were so small, and ditches and houses and canal
banks and hedgerows.  It was like Normandy only flatter.  I think it
must have been something like fighting in Holland.'

'That river sure doesn't look anything like the Rapido.'

'It was a pretty good old river,' the Colonel said.  'Up above, it had
plenty of water then, before all these hydro-electric projects.  And it
had very deep and tricky channels in the pebbles and shingle when it
was shallow.'

He knew how boring any man's war is to any other man, and he stopped
talking about it.  They always take it personally, he thought.  No one
is interested in it, abstractly, except soldiers and there are not many
soldiers.  You make them and the good ones are killed, and above they
are always bucking for something so hard they never look or listen.
They are always thinking of what they have seen and while you are
talking they are thinking of what they will say and what it may lead to
in their advancement or their privilege.  There was no sense boring
this boy, who, for all his combat infantryman badge, his Purple Heart
and the other things he wore, was in no sense a soldier but only a man
placed, against his will, in uniform, who had elected to remain in the
army for his own ends.

'What did you do in civil life, Jackson?' he asked.

'I was partners with my brother in a garage in Rawlins, Wyoming, sir.

'Are you going back there?'

'My brother got killed in the Pacific and the guy who was running the
garage was no good,' the driver said.  'We lost what we had put in it.'

'That's bad,' the Colonel said.

'You're God-damned right it's bad,' the driver said and added, 'sir'.

The Colonel looked up the road.

He knew that if they kept on this road they would come, shortly, to the
turn that he was waiting for; but he was impatient.

'Keep your eyes open and take a left hand turn on the road leading off
this pike,' he told the driver.

'Do you think those low roads will be good with this big car, sir?'

'We'll see,' the Colonel said.  'Hell, man, it hasn't rained in three
weeks.'

'I don't trust those side roads in this low country.'

'If we get stuck, I'll haul you out with oxen.'

'I was only thinking about the car, sir.'

'Well, think about what I told you and turn off on the first left side
road you see if it looks practicable.'

'That looks like one coming up, from the hedges,' the driver said.

'You're all clear behind.  Pull up just ahead of it and I'll go over
and have a look.'

He stepped out of the car and walked across the wide, hard-surfaced
road and looked at the narrow dirt road, with the swift flowing canal
beside it, and the thick hedge beyond.  Beyond the hedge, he saw a low
red farmhouse with a big barn.  The road was dry.  There were not even
cart ruts sunk in it.  He got back into the car.

'It's a boulevard,' he said.  'Quit worrying.'

'Yes, sir.  It's your car, sir.'

'I know,' the Colonel said.  'I'm still paying for it.  Say, Jackson,
do you always suffer so much any time you go off a highway on to a
secondary road?'

'No, sir.  But there's a lot of difference between a jeep, and a car as
low hung as this.  Do you know the clearance you have on your
differential and your body frame on this?'

'I've got a shovel in the truck and we've got chains.  Wait till you
see where we're going after we leave Venice.'

'Do we go all the way in this car?'

'I don't know.  I'll see.'

'Think about your fenders, sir.'

'We'll cut the fenders off like the Indians do in Oklahoma.  She's
over-fendered right now.  She's got too much of everything except
engine.  Jackson, that's a real engine she's got.'

'It certainly is, sir.  It's a great pleasure to drive that big engine
on the good roads.  That's why I don't want anything to happen to her.'

'That's very good of you, Jackson.  Now just quit suffering.'

'I'm not suffering, sir.'

'Good,' said the Colonel.

He was not, either, because just then he saw, beyond the line of
close-bunched brown trees ahead, a sail moving along.  It was a big red
sail, raked sharply down from the peak, and it moved slowly behind the
trees.

Why should it always move your heart to see a sail moving along through
the country, the Colonel thought.  Why does it move my heart to see the
great, slow, pale oxen?  It must be the gait as well as the look of
them and the size and the colour.

But a good fine big mule, or a string of pack mules in good condition,
moves me, too.  So does a coyote every time I ever see one, and a wolf,
gaited like no other animal, grey and sure of himself, carrying that
heavy head and with the hostile eyes.

'Ever see any wolves out around Rawlins, Jackson?'

'No, sir.  Wolves were gone before my time; they poisoned them out.
Plenty coyotes, though.'

'Do you like coyotes?'

'I like to hear them nights.'

'So do I.  Better than anything, except seeing a ship sailing along
through the country.'

'There's a boat doing that over there, sir.'

'On the Sile canal,' the Colonel told him.  'She's a sailing barge
going to Venice.  This wind is off the mountains now and she makes it
along pretty good.  It's liable to turn really cold to-night if this
wind holds and it ought to bring in plenty ducks.  Turn to your left
here and we'll run along the canal.  There's a good road.'

'They didn't have much duck shooting where I came from.  But there was
plenty of it in Nebraska along the Platte.'

'Do you want to shoot where we're going?'

'I don't believe so, sir.  I'm not much of a shot, and I'd rather stay
in that sack.  It's a Sunday morning, you know.'

'I know,' the Colonel said.  'You can stay in the sack until noon if
you want.'

'I brought my repellent.  I ought to sleep O.K.'

'I'm not sure you'll need it,' the Colonel said.  'Did you bring any
K-rations or Ten in One?  They're liable to eat Italian food, you know.'

'I brought a few cans to help out and a little stuff to give away.'

'That's good,' the Colonel said.

He was looking ahead now to see where the canal road joined the main
highway again.  There he knew that he would see it on a clear day such
as this was.  Across the marshes, brown as those at the mouths of the
Mississippi around Pilot Town are in winter, and with their reeds bent
by the heavy north wind, he saw the squared tower of the church at
Torcello and the high _campanile_ of Burano beyond it.  The sea was a
slate blue and he could see the sails of twelve sailing barges running
with the wind for Venice.

I'll have to wait until we cross the Dese River above Noghera to see it
perfectly, he thought.  It is strange to remember how we fought back
there along the canal that winter to defend it and we never saw it.
Then one time, I was back as far as Noghera and it was clear and cold
like to-day, and I saw it across the water.  But I never got into it.
It is my city, though, because I fought for it when I was a boy, and
now that I am half a hundred years old, they know I fought for it and
am a part owner and they treat me well.

Do you think that's why they treat you well, he asked himself.

Maybe, he thought.  Maybe they treat me well because I'm a chicken
colonel on the winning side.  I don't believe it, though.  I hope not,
anyway.  It is not France, he thought.

There you fight your way into a city that you love and are very careful
about breaking anything and then, if you have good sense, you are
careful not to go back because you will meet some military characters
who will resent your having fought your way in.  _Vive la France et les
pommes de terre frites.  Liberté, Venalité, et Stupidité_.  The great
_clarte_ of the French military thinking.  They haven't had a military
thinker since du Picq.  He was a poor bloody Colonel, too.  _Mangin_,
_Maginot_ and _Gamelin_.  Take your choice, Gentlemen.  Three schools
of thought.  One; I hit them on the nose.  Two; I hide behind this
thing which does not cover my left flank.  Three; I hide my head in the
sand like an ostrich, confident in the greatness of France as a
military power and then take off.

Take off is putting it very cleanly and pleasantly.  Sure, he thought,
whenever you over-simplify you become unjust.  Remember all the fine
ones in the Resistance, remember Foch both fought and organized and
remember how fine the people were.  Remember your good friends and
remember your deads.  Remember plenty things and your best friends
again and the finest people that you know.  Don't be a bitter nor a
stupid.  And what has that to do with soldiering as a trade?  Cut it
out, he told himself.  You're on a trip to have fun.

'Jackson,' he said, 'are you happy?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Good.  Shortly, we are coming to a view that I want you to see.  You
only have to take one look at it.  The entire operation will be
practically painless.'

I wonder what he's riding me for now, the driver thought.  Just because
he was a B.G. once he knows everything.  If he was any good as a B.G.
why didn't he hold it?  He's been beat up so much he's slug-nutty.

'There's the view, Jackson,' the Colonel said.  'Stop her by the side
of the road and we'll take a look.'

The Colonel and the driver walked over to the Venice side of the road
and looked across the lagoon that was whipped by the strong, cold wind
from the mountains that sharpened all the outlines of buildings so that
they were geometrically clear.

'That's Torcello directly opposite us,' the Colonel pointed.  'That
where the people lived that were driven off the mainland by the
Visigoths.  They built that church you see there with the square tower.
There were thirty thousand people lived there once and they built that
church to honour their Lord and to worship him.  Then, after they built
it, the mouth of the Sile River silted up or a big flood changed it,
and all that land we came through just now got flooded and started to
breed mosquitoes and malaria hit them.  They all started to die, so the
elders got together and decided they should pull out to a healthy place
that would be defensible with boats, and where the Visigoths and the
Lombards and the other bandits couldn't get at them, because these
bandits had no sea-power.  The Torcello boys were all great boatmen.
So they took the stones of all their houses in barges, like that one we
just saw, and they built Venice.'

He stopped.  'Am I boring you, Jackson?'

'No, sir.  I had no idea who pioneered Venice.'

'It was the boys from Torcello.  They were very tough and they had very
good taste in building.  They came from a little place up the coast
called Caorle.  But they drew on all the people from the towns and the
farms behind when the Visigoths overran them.  It was a Torcello boy
who was running arms into Alexandria, who located the body of St. Mark
and smuggled it out under a load of fresh pork so the infidel customs
guards wouldn't check him.  This boy brought the remains of St. Mark to
Venice, and he's their patron saint and they have a cathedral there to
him.  But by that time, they were trading so far to the east that the
architecture is pretty Byzantine for my taste.  They never built any
better than at the start there in Torcello.  That's Torcello there.'

It was, indeed.

'St Mark's square is where the pigeons are and where they have that big
cathedral that looks sort of like a moving picture palace, isn't it?'

'Right, Jackson.  You're on the ball.  If that's the way you look at
it.  Now you look beyond Torcello you will see the lovely campanile on
Burano that has damn near as much list on it as the leaning tower of
Pisa.  That Burano is a very over-populated little island where the
women make wonderful lace, and the men make bambinis and work day-times
in the glass factories in that next island you see on beyond with the
other campanile, which is Murano.  They make wonderful glass day-times
for the rich of all the world, and then they come home on the little
vaporetto and make bambinis.  Not everyone passes every night with his
wife though.  They hunt ducks nights too, with big punt guns, out along
the edge of the marshes on this lagoon you're looking across now.  All
night long on a moonlight night you hear the shots.'  He paused.

'Now when you look past Murano you see Venice.  That's my town.
There's plenty more I could show you, but I think we probably ought to
roll now.  But take one good look at it.  This is where you can see how
it all happened.  But nobody ever looks at it from here.'

'It's a beautiful view.  Thank you, sir.'

'O.K.,' the Colonel said.  'Let's roll.'




Chapter V

But he continued to look and it was all as wonderful to him and it
moved him as it had when he was eighteen years old and had seen it
first, understanding nothing of it and only knowing that it was
beautiful.  The winter had come very cold that year and all the
mountains were white beyond the plain.  It was necessary for the
Austrians to try to break through at the angle where the Sile River and
the old bed of the Piave were the only lines of defence.

If you had the old bed of the Piave then you had the Sile to fall back
on if the first line did not hold.  Beyond the Sile there was nothing
but bare-assed plain and a good road network into the Veneto plain and
the plains of Lombardy, and the Austrians attacked again and again and
again late through the winter, to try to get on to this fine road that
they were rolling on now which led straight to Venice.  That winter the
Colonel, who was a lieutenant then, and in a foreign army, which had
always made him slightly suspect afterwards in his own army, and had
done his career no good, had a sore throat all winter.  This sore
throat was from being in the water so much.  You could not get dry and
it was better to get wet quickly and stay wet.

The Austrian attacks were ill co-ordinated, but they were constant and
exasperated and you first had the heavy bombardment which was supposed
to put you out of business, and then, when it lifted, you checked your
positions and counted the people.  But you had no time to care for
wounded, since you knew that the attack was coming immediately, and
then you killed the men who came wading across the marshes, holding
their rifles above the water and coming as slow as men wade, waist deep.

If they did not lift the shelling when it started, the Colonel, then a
lieutenant, often thought, I do not know what we would be able to do.
But they always lifted it and moved it back ahead of the attack.

If we had lost the old Piave and were on the Sile they would move it
back to the second and third lines; although such lines were quite
untenable, and they should have brought all their guns up very close
and whammed it in all the time they attacked and until they breached
us.  But thank God, some high fool always controls it, the Colonel
thought, and they did it piecemeal.

All that winter, with a bad sore throat, he had killed men who came,
wearing the stick bombs hooked up on a harness under their shoulders
with the heavy, calf-hide packs and the bucket helmets.  They were the
enemy.

But he never hated them; nor could have any feeling about them.  He
commanded with an old sock around his throat, which had been dipped in
turpentine, and they broke down the attacks with rifle fire and with
the machine guns which still existed, or were usable, after the
bombardment.  He taught his people to shoot, really, which is a rare
ability in continental troops, and to be able to look at the enemy when
they came, and, because there was always a dead moment when the
shooting was free, they became very good at it.

But you always had to count and count fast after the bombardment to
know how many shooters you would have.  He was hit three times that
winter, but they were all gift wounds; small wounds in the flesh of the
body without breaking bone, and he had become quite confident of his
personal immortality since he knew he should have been killed in the
heavy artillery bombardment that always preceded the attacks.  Finally,
he did get hit properly and for good.  No one of his other wounds had
ever done to him what the first big one did.  I suppose it is just the
loss of the immortality, he thought.  Well, in a way, that is quite a
lot to lose.

This country meant very much to him, more than he could, or would ever
tell anyone and now he sat in the car happy that in another half hour
they would be in Venice.  He took two mannitol hexanitrate tablets;
since he had always been able to spit since 1918, he could take them
dry, and asked:

'How are you doing, Jackson?'

'Fine, sir.'

'Take the left outside road when we hit the fork for Mestre and we'll
be able to see the boats along the canal and miss that main traffic.'

'Yes, sir,' the driver said.  'Will you check me on the fork?'

'Of course,' the Colonel said.

They were coming up on Mestre fast, and already it was like going to
New York the first time you were ever there in the old days when it was
shining, white and beautiful.  I stole that, he thought.  But that was
before the smoke.  We are coming into my town, he thought.  Christ,
what a lovely town.

They made the left turn and came along the canal where the fishing
boats tied up, and the Colonel looked at them and his heart was happy
because of the brown nets and the wicker fish traps and the clean,
beautiful lines of the boats.  It's not that they are picturesque.  The
hell with picturesque.  They are just damned beautiful.

They passed the long line of boats in the slow canal that carried water
from the Brenta, and he thought about the long stretch of the Brenta
where the great villas were, with their lawns and their gardens and the
plane trees and the cypresses.  I'd like to be buried out there, he
thought.  I know the place very well.  I don't believe you could fix
it, though.  I don't know.  I know some people that might let me be
buried on their place.  I'll ask Alberto.  He might think it was
morbid, though.

For a long time he had been thinking about all the fine places he would
like to be buried and what parts of the earth he would like to be a
part of.  The stinking, putrefying part doesn't last very long, really,
he thought, and anyway you are just a sort of mulch, and even the bones
will be some use finally.  I'd like to be buried way out at the edge of
the grounds, but in sight of the old graceful house and the tall, great
trees.  I don't think it would be much of a nuisance to them.  I could
be a part of the ground where the children play in the evenings, and in
the mornings, maybe, they would still be training jumping horses and
their hoofs would make the thudding on the turf, and trout would rise
in the pool when there was a hatch of fly.

They were up on the causeway from Mestre to Venice now with the ugly
Breda works that might have been Hammond, Indiana.

'What do they make there, sir?' Jackson asked.

'The company makes locomotives in Milan,' the Colonel said.  'Here they
make a little of everything in the metallurgic line.'

It was a miserable view of Venice now and he always disliked this
causeway except that you made such good time and you could see the
buoys and the channels.

'This town makes a living on its own,' he said to Jackson.  'She used
to be the queen of the seas and the people are very tough and they give
less of a good God-damn about things than almost anybody you'll ever
meet.  It's a tougher town than Cheyenne when you really know it, and
everybody is very polite.'

'I wouldn't say Cheyenne was a tough town, sir.'

'Well, it's a tougher town than Casper.'

'Do you think that's a tough town, sir?'

'It's an oil town.  It's a nice town.'

'But I don't think it's tough, sir.  Or ever was.'

'O.K., Jackson.  Maybe we move in different circles.  Or maybe we have
a differing definition for the word.  But this town of Venice, with
everybody being polite and having good manners, is as tough as Cooke
City, Montana, on the day they have the Old Timers' Fish Fry.'

'My idea of a tough town is Memphis.'

'Not like Chicago, Jackson.  Memphis is only tough if you are a Negro.
Chicago is tough North, South, there isn't any East and West.  But
nobody has any manners.  But in this country, if you ever want to know
a _really_ tough town where they eat wonderfully, too, go to Bologna.'

'I never was there.'

'Well, there's the Fiat garage where we leave the car,' the Colonel
said.  'You can leave the key at the office.  They don't steal.  I'll
go in the bar while you park upstairs.  They have people that will
bring the bags.'

'Is it O.K. to leave your gun and shooting gear in the trunk, sir?'

'Sure.  They don't steal here.  I told you that once.'

'I wanted to take the necessary precautions, sir, on your valuable
property.'

'You're so damned noble that sometimes you stink,' the Colonel said.
'Get the wax out of your ears and hear what I say the first time.'

'I heard you, sir,' Jackson said.  The Colonel looked at him
contemplatively and with the old deadliness.

He sure is a mean son of a bitch, Jackson thought, and he can be so
God-damn nice.

'Get my and your bag out and park her up there and check your oil, your
water and your tyres,' the Colonel said, and walked across the oil and
rubber stained cement of the entry of the bar.




Chapter VI

In the bar, sitting at the first table as he came in, there was a
post-war rich from Milan, fat and hard as only Milanese can be, sitting
with his expensive looking and extremely desirable mistress.  They were
drinking negronis, a combination of two sweet vermouths and seltzer
water, and the Colonel wondered how much taxes the man had escaped to
buy that sleek girl in her long mink coat and the convertible he had
seen the chauffeur take up the long, winding ramp to lock away.  The
pair stared at him with the bad manners of their kind and he saluted,
lightly and said to them in Italian, 'I am sorry that I am in uniform.
But it is a uniform.  Not a costume.'

Then he turned his back on them, without waiting to see the effect of
his remark, and walked to the bar.  From the bar you could watch your
luggage, just as well as the two _pescecani_ were watching theirs.

He is probably a Commendatore, he thought.  She is a beautiful, hard
piece of work.  She is damned beautiful, actually.  I wonder what it
would have been like if I had ever had the money to buy me that kind
and put them into the mink?  I'll settle for what I have, he thought,
and they can go and hang themselves.

The bar-tender shook hands with him.  This bar-tender was an Anarchist
but he did not mind the Colonel being a Colonel at all.  He was
delighted by it and proud and loving about it as though the Anarchists
had a Colonel, too, and in some ways, in the several months that they
had known each other, he seemed to feel that he had invented, or at
least erected, the Colonel as you might be happy about participating in
the erection of a _campanile_, or even the old church at Torcello.

The bar-tender had heard the conversation, or, rather, the flat
statement at the table and he was very happy.

He had already sent down, via the dumb-waiter, for a Gordon's gin and
Campari and he said, 'It is coming up in that hand-pulled device.  How
does everything go at Trieste?'

'About as you would imagine.'

'I couldn't even imagine.'

'Then don't strain,' the Colonel said, 'and you will never get piles.'

'I wouldn't mind it if I was a Colonel.'

'I never mind it.'

'You'd be overrun like a dose of salts,' the waiter said.

'Don't tell the Honorable Pacciardi,' the Colonel said.

He and the bar-tender had a joke about this because the Honourable
Pacciardi was Minister of Defence in the Italian Republic.  He was the
same age as the Colonel and had fought very well in the first world
war, and had also fought in Spain as a battalion commander where the
Colonel had known him when he, himself, was an observer.  The
seriousness with which the Honourable Pacciardi took the post of
Minister of Defence of an indefensible country was a bond between the
Colonel and the bar-tender.  The two of them were quite practical men
and the vision of the Honourable Pacciardi defending the Italian
Republic stimulated their minds.

'It's sort of funny up there,' the Colonel said, 'and I don't mind it.'

'We must mechanize the Honourable Pacciardi,' the bar-tender said.
'And supply him with the atomic bomb.'

'I've got three of them in the back of the car,' the Colonel said.
'The new model, complete with handles.  But we can't leave him unarmed.
We must supply him with botulism and anthrax.'

'We cannot fail the Honourable Pacciardi,' the bar-tender said.
'Better to live one day as a lion than a hundred years as a sheep.'

'Better to die on our feet than to live on our knees,' the Colonel
said.  'Though you better get on your belly damn fast if you want to
stay alive in plenty places.'

'Colonel, do not say anything subversive.'

'We will strangle them with our bare hands,' the Colonel said.  'A
million men will spring to arms overnight.'

'Whose arms?' the bar-tender asked.

'All that will be attended to,' the Colonel said.  'It's only a phase
in the Big Picture.'

Just then the driver came in the door.  The Colonel saw that while they
had been joking, he had not watched the door and he was annoyed,
always, with any lapse of vigilance or of security.

'What the hell's been keeping you, Jackson?  Have a drink.'

'No, thank you, sir.'

You prissy jerk, the Colonel thought.  But I better stop riding him; he
corrected.

'We'll be going in a minute,' the Colonel said.  'I've been trying to
learn Italian from my friend here.'  He turned to look at the Milan
profiteers; but they were gone.

I'm getting awfully slow, he thought.  Somebody will take me any day
now.  Maybe even the Honourable Pacciardi, he thought.

'How much do I owe you?' he asked the bar-tender shortly.

The bar-tender told him and looked at him with his wise Italian eyes,
not merry now, although the lines of merriment were clearly cut where
they radiated from the corners of each eye.  I hope there is nothing
wrong with him, the bar-tender thought.  I hope to God, or anything
else, there's nothing really bad.

'Good-bye, my Colonel,' he said.

'_Ciao_,' the Colonel said.  'Jackson, we are going down the long ramp
and due north from the exit to where the small launches are moored.
The varnished ones.  There is a porter with the two bags.  It is
necessary to let them carry them since they have a concession.'

'Yes, sir,' said Jackson.

The two of them went out the door and no one looked back at anyone.

At the _imbarcadero_, the Colonel tipped the man who had carried their
two bags and then looked around for a boatman he knew.

He did not recognize the man in the launch that was first on call, but
the boatman said, 'Good day, my Colonel.  I'm the first.'

'How much is it to the Gritti?'

'You know as well as I, my Colonel.  We do not bargain.  We have a
fixed tariff.'

'What's the tariff?'

'Three thousand five hundred.'

'We could go on the vaporetto for sixty.'

'And nothing prevents you going,' the boatman, who was an elderly man
with a red but un-choleric face, said.  'They won't take you to the
Gritti but they will stop at the _imbarcadero_ past Harry's, and you
can telephone for someone from the Gritti to get your bags.'

And what would I buy with the God-damn three thousand five hundred
lire; and this is a good old man.

'Do you want me to send that man there?' he pointed to a destroyed old
man who did odd jobs and ran errands around the docks, always ready
with the un-needed aid to the elbow of the ascending or descending
passenger, always ready to help when no help was needed, his old felt
hat held out as he bowed after the unneeded act.  'He'll take you to
the vaporetto.  There's one in twenty minutes.'

'The hell with it,' the Colonel said.  'Take us to the Gritti.'

'_Con piacere_,' the boatman said.

The Colonel and Jackson lowered themselves into the launch which looked
like a speed boat.  It was radiantly varnished and lovingly kept and
was powered with a marine conversion of a tiny Fiat engine that had
served its allotted time in the car of a provincial doctor and had been
purchased out of one of the graveyards of automobiles; those mechanical
elephant cemeteries that are the one certain thing you may find in our
world near any populated centre; and been re-conditioned and
re-converted to start this new life on the canals of this city.

'How is the motor doing?' the Colonel asked.  He could hear her
sounding like a stricken tank or T.D., except the noises were in
miniature from the lack of power.

'So-so,' the boatman said.  He moved his free hand in a parallel motion.

'You ought to get the smallest model Universal puts out.  That's the
best and lightest small marine engine I know.'

'Yes,' the boatman said.  'There are quite a few things I should get.'

'Maybe you'll have a good year.'

'It's always possible.  Lots of _pescecani_ come down from Milano to
gamble at the Lido.  But nobody would ride twice in this thing on
purpose.  As a boat, it is fine, too.  It is a well built, pleasant
boat.  Not beautiful as a gondola is, of course.  But it needs an
engine.'

'I might get you a jeep engine.  One that was condemned and you could
work it over.'

'Don't talk about such things,' the boatman said.  'Things like that
don't happen.  I don't want to think about it.'

'You can think about it,' the Colonel said.  'I'm talking true.'

'You mean it.'

'Sure.  I don't guarantee anything.  I'll see what I can do.  How many
children have you got?'

'Six.  Two male and four female.'

'Hell, you mustn't have believed in the Regime.  Only six.'

'I _didn't_ believe in the Regime.'

'You don't have to give me that stuff,' the Colonel said.  'It would
have been quite natural for you to _have_ believed in it.  Do you think
I hold that against a man after we've won?'

They were through the dull part of the canal that runs from Piazzale
Roma to Ca'Foscari, though none of it is dull, the Colonel thought.

It doesn't all have to be palaces nor churches.  Certainly that isn't
dull.  He looked to the right, the starboard, he thought.  I'm on the
water.  It was a long low pleasant building and there was a trattoria
next to it.

I ought to live here.  On retirement pay I could make it all right.  No
Gritti Palace.  A room in a house like that and the tides and the boats
going by.  I could read in the mornings and walk around town before
lunch and go every day to see the Tintorettos at the Accademia and to
the Sculoa San Rocco and eat in good cheap joints behind the market or,
maybe, the woman that ran the house would cook in the evenings.

I think it would be better to have lunch out and get some exercise
walking.  It's a good town to walk in.  I guess the best, probably.  I
never walked in it that it wasn't fun.  I could learn it really well,
he thought, and then I'd have that.

It's a strange, tricky town and to walk from any part to any other
given part of it is better than working crossword puzzles.  It's one of
the few things to our credit that we never smacked it, and to their
credit that they respected it.

Christ, I love it, he said, and I'm so happy I helped defend it when I
was a punk kid, and with an insufficient command of the language and I
never even saw her until that clear day in the winter when I went back
to have that small wound dressed, and saw her rising from the sea.
Merde, he thought, we did very well that winter up at the junction.

I wish I could fight it again, he thought.  Knowing what I know now and
having what we have now.  But they'd have it too and the essential
problem is just the same, except who holds the air.

And all this time he had been watching the bow of the beat-up
beautifully varnished, delicately brass-striped boat, with the brass
all beautifully polished, cut the brown water and seen the small
traffic problems.

They went under the white bridge and under the unfinished wood bridge.
Then they left the red bridge on the right and passed under the first
high-flying white bridge.  Then there was the black iron fret-work
bridge on the canal leading into the Rio Nuovo and they passed the two
stakes chained together but not touching: like us the Colonel thought.
He watched the tide pull at them and he saw how the chains had worn the
wood since he first had seen them.  That's us, he thought.  That's our
monument.  And how many monuments are there to us in the canals of this
town?

Then they still went slowly until the great lantern that was on the
right of the entrance to the Grand Canal where the engine commenced its
metallic agony that produced a slight increase in speed.

Now they came down and under the Accademia between the pilings where
they passed, at touching distance, a heavily loaded black, diesel boat
full of cut timber, cut to chunks, to burn for firewood in the damp
houses of the Sea City.

'That's beech, isn't it?' the Colonel asked the boatman.

'Beech and another wood that is cheaper that I do not recall, at this
moment, the name of.'

'Beech is, to an open fire, as anthracite coal is to a stove.  Where do
they cut that beech?'

'I'm not a man of the mountains.  But I think it comes from up beyond
Bassano on the other side of the Grappa.  I went there to the Grappa to
see where my brother was buried.  It was an excursion that they made
from Bassano, and we went to the big ossario.  But we returned by
Feltre.  I could see it was a fine timber country on the other side as
you came down the mountains into the valley.  We came down that
military road, and they were hauling lots of wood.'

'In what year was your brother killed on Grappa?'

'In nineteen-eighteen.  He was a patriot and inflamed by hearing
d'Annunzio talk, and he volunteered before his class was called.  We
never knew him very well because he went so quickly.'

'How many were you in the family?'

'We were six.  We lost two beyond the Isonzo, one on the Bainsizza and
one on the Carso.  Then we lost this brother I speak of on the Grappa
and I remained.'

'I'll get you the God-damned jeep complete with handles,' the Colonel
said.  'Now let's not be morbid and look for all the places where my
friends live.'

They were moving up the Grand Canal now and it was easy to see where
your friends lived.

'That's the house of the Contessa Dandolo,' the Colonel said.

He did not say, but thought, she is over eighty, and she is as gay as a
girl and does not have any fear of dying.  She dies her hair red and it
looks very well.  She is a good companion and an admirable woman.

Her palazzo was pleasant looking, set well back from the Canal with a
garden in front and a landing place of its own where many gondolas had
come, in their various times, bringing hearty, cheerful, sad and
disillusioned people.  But most of them had been cheerful because they
were going to see the Contessa Dandolo.

Now, beating up the Canal, against the cold wind off the mountains, and
with the houses as clear and sharp as on a winter day, which, of
course, it was, they saw the old magic of the city and its beauty.  But
it was conditioned, for the Colonel, by his knowing many of the people
who lived in the palazzos; or if no one lived there now, knowing to
what use the different places had been put.

There's Alvarito's mother's house, he thought, and did not say.

She never lives there much and stays out at the country house near
Treviso where they have trees.  She's tired of there not being trees in
Venice.  She lost a fine man and nothing really interests her now
except efficiency.

But the family at one time lent the house to George Gordon, Lord Byron,
and nobody sleeps now in Byron's bed nor in the other bed, two flights
below, where he used to sleep with the gondolier's wife.  They are not
sacred, nor relics.  They are just extra beds that were not used
afterwards for various reasons, or possibly to respect Lord Byron who
was well loved in this town, in spite of all the errors he committed.
You have to be a tough boy in this town to be loved, the Colonel
thought.  They never cared anything for Robert Browning, nor Mrs.
Robert Browning, nor for their dog.  They weren't Venetians no matter
how well he wrote of it.  And what is a tough boy, he asked himself.
You use it so loosely you should be able to define it.  I suppose it is
a man who will make his play and then backs it up.  Or just a man who
backs his play.  And I'm not thinking of the theatre, he thought.
Lovely as the theatre can be.

And yet, he thought, seeing now the little villa, close up against the
water, ugly as a building you would see on the boat train from Havre or
Cherbourg, coming into the banlieue before Paris as you came into town.
It was overrun with badly administered trees, and not a place that you
would live in if you could help it.  There _he_ lived.

They loved him for his talent, and because he was bad, and he was
brave.  A Jewish boy with nothing, he stormed the country with his
talent, and his rhetoric.  He was a more miserable character than any
that I know and as mean.  But the man I think of to compare him with
never put the chips on the line and went to war, the Colonel thought,
and Gabriele d'Annunzio (I always wondered what his real name was, he
thought, because nobody is named d'Annunzio in a practical country and
perhaps he was not Jewish and what difference did it make if he was or
was not) had moved through the different arms of the service as he had
moved into and out of the arms of different women.

All the arms were pleasant that d'Annunzio served with and the mission
was fast and easily over, except the Infantry.  He remembered how
d'Annunzio had lost an eye in a crash, flying as an observer, over
Trieste or Pola, and how, afterwards, he had always worn a patch over
it and people who did not know, for, then, no one really knew, thought
it had been shot out at the Veliki or San Michele or some other bad
place beyond the Carso where everyone died, or was incapacitated, that
you knew.  But d'Annunzio, truly, was only making heroic gestures with
the other things.  An Infantryman knows a strange trade, he thought;
perhaps the strangest.  He, Gabriele, flew, but he was not a flier.  He
was in the Infantry but he was not an Infantryman and it was always the
same appearances.

And the Colonel remembered one time when he had stood, commanding a
platoon of assault troops, while it was raining in one of the
interminable winters, when the rain fell always; or at least, always
when there were parades or speeches to the troops, and d'Annunzio, with
his lost eye, covered by the patch, and his white face, as white as the
belly of a sole, new turned over in the market, the brown side not
showing, and looking thirty hours dead, was shouting.  'Morire non a
basta,' and the Colonel, then a lieutenant, had thought, 'What the muck
more do they want of us?'

But he had followed the discourse and, at the end, when the
Lieutenant-Colonel d'Annunzio, writer and national hero, certified and
true if you must have heroes, and the Colonel did not believe in
heroes, asked for a moment of silence for our glorious dead, he had
stood stiffly to attention.  But his platoon, who had not followed the
speech, there being no loud speakers then, and they being slightly out
of hearing of the orator, responded, as one man, at the pause for the
moment of silence for our glorious dead, with a solid and ringing
'Evviva d'Annunzio'.

They had been addressed before by d'Annunzio after victories, and
before defeats, and they knew what they should shout if there was any
pause by an orator.

The Colonel, being then a lieutenant, and loving his platoon, had
joined with them and uttered, with the tone of command, 'Evviva
d'Annunzio', thus absolving all those who had not listened to the
discourse, speech, or harangue and attempting, in the small way a
lieutenant can attempt anything, except to hold an indefensible
position; or intelligently direct his own part in an attack; to share
their guilt.

But now he was passing the house where the poor beat-up old boy had
lived with his great, sad and never properly loved actress and he
thought of her wonderful hands and her so transformable face, that was
not beautiful, but that gave you all love, glory and delight and
sadness; and of the way the curve of her forearm could break your
heart, and he thought, Christ they are dead and I do not know where
either one is buried even.  But I certainly hope they had fun in that
house.

'Jackson,' he said, 'that small villa on the left belonged to Gabriele
d'Annunzio, who was a great writer.'

'Yes, sir,' said Jackson, 'I'm glad to know about him.  I never heard
of him.'

'I'll check you out on what he wrote if you ever want to read him,' the
Colonel said.  'There are some fair English translations.'

'Thank you, sir,' said Jackson.  'I'd like to read him any time I have
time.  He has a nice practical looking place.  What did you say the
name was?'

'D'Annunzio,' the Colonel said.  'Writer.'

He added to himself, not wishing to confuse Jackson, nor be difficult,
as he had been with the man several times that day, writer, poet,
national hero, phraser of the dialectic of Fascism, macabre egotist,
aviator, commander, or rider, in the first of the fast torpedo attack
boats, Lieutenant-Colonel of Infantry without knowing how to command a
company, nor a platoon properly, the great, lovely writer of _Notturno_
whom we respect, and jerk.

Up ahead now there was a crossing place of gondolas at the Santa Maria
del Giglio and, beyond, was the wooden dock of the Gritti.

'That's the hotel where we are stopping at, Jackson.'

The Colonel indicated the three-storey, rose-coloured, small, pleasant
palace abutting on the Canal.  It had been a dependence of the Grand
Hotel--but now it was its own hotel and a very good one.  It was
probably the best hotel, if you did not wish to be fawned on, or fussed
over, or over-flunkied, in a city of great hotels and the Colonel loved
it.

'It looks O.K. to me, sir,' Jackson said.

'It is O.K.,' the Colonel said.

The motor boat came gallantly up beside the piling of the dock.  Every
move she makes, the Colonel thought, is a triumph of the gallantry of
the ageing machine.  We do not have war horses now like old Traveller,
or Marbot's Lysette who fought, personally, at Eylau.  We have the
gallantry of worn through-rods that refuse to break; the cylinder head
that does not blow though it has every right to and the rest of it.

'We're at the dock, sir,' Jackson said.

'Where the hell else would we be, man.  Jump out while I settle with
this sportsman.'

He turned to the boatman and said, 'That was thirty-five hundred,
wasn't it?'

'Yes, my Colonel.'

'I'll not forget about the over-age jeep engine.  Take this and buy
your horse some oats.'

The porter, who was taking the bags from Jackson, heard this and
laughed.

'No veterinarian will ever fix his horse.'

'She still runs,' the boatman said.

'But she doesn't win any races,' the porter said.  'How are you, my
Colonel?'

'I couldn't be better,' the Colonel said.  'How are all the members of
the Order?'

'All members are well.'

'Good,' said the Colonel.  'I will go in and see the Grand Master.'

'He is waiting for you, my Colonel.'

'Let us not keep him waiting, Jackson,' the Colonel said.  'You may
proceed to the lobby with this gentleman and tell them to sign me in.
See the sergeant gets a room,' he said to the porter.  'We're here for
the night only.'

'The Baron Alvarito was here looking for you.'

'I'll find him at Harry's.'

'Good, my Colonel.'

'Where is the Grand Master?'

'I'll find him for you.'

'Tell him I'll be in the bar.'




Chapter VII

The bar was just across from the lobby of the Gritti, although lobby
the Colonel thought, was not the accurate term to describe that
gracious entrance.  Didn't Giotto describe a circle, he thought?  No,
that was in maths.  What he remembered and loved best as an anecdote
about that painter was: 'It was easy,' said Giotto as he drew the
perfect circle.  Who the hell had said that and where?

'Good evening, Privy Councillor,' he said to the bar-man, who was not a
full paid-up member of the order but whom he did not wish to offend.
'What can I do for you?'

'Drink, my Colonel.'

The Colonel looked out of the windows and the door of the bar on to the
waters of the Grand Canal.  He could see the big black hitching post
for the gondolas and the later afternoon winter light on the wind-swept
water.  Across the Canal was the old Palace and a wood barge, black and
broad, was coming up the Canal, her bluff bows pushing up a wave even
though she had the wind behind her.

'Make it a very dry Martini,' the Colonel said.  'A double.'

Just then the Grand Master came into the room.  He was wearing his
formal attire as a head waiter.  He was truly handsome as a man should
be, from the inside out, so that his smile starts from his heart, or
whatever is the centre of the body, and comes frankly and beautifully
to the surface, which is the face.

He had a fine face with the long, straight nose of his part of the
Veneto; the kind, gay, truthful eyes and the honourable white hair of
his age, which was two years older than that of the Colonel.

He advanced smiling, lovingly and yet conspiratorially, since they both
shared many secrets and he extended his hand, which was a big, long,
strong, spatular-fingered hand; well kept as was becoming, as well as
necessary, to his position and the Colonel extended his own hand, which
had been shot through twice and was slightly misshapen.  Thus contact
was made between two old inhabitants of the Veneto, both men and
brothers in their membership in the human race, the only club that
either one paid dues to and brothers, too, in their love of an old
country, much fought over and always triumphant in defeat, which they
had both defended in their youth.

Their handshake was only long enough to feel, firmly, the contact and
the pleasure of meeting and then the Maitre d'Hotel said, 'My Colonel.'

The Colonel said, '_Gran Maestro_.'

Then the Colonel asked the _Gran Maestro_ to accompany him in a drink,
but the Maitre d'Hotel said that he was working.  It was impossible as
well as forbidden.

'---- forbidden,' said the Colonel.

'Of course,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'But everyone must comply with
his duty and here the rules are reasonable and we all should comply
with them; me especially, as a matter of precept.'

'Not for nothing are you the _Gran Maestro_,' the Colonel said.

'Give me a small _Carpano punto e mezzo_,' the _Gran Maestro_ said to
the bar-tender, who was still outside of the Order for some small, not
defined, unstated reason.  'To drink to the ordine.'

Thus, violating orders and the principle of precept and example in
command, the Colonel and the _Gran Maestro_ downed a quick one.  They
did not hurry nor did the _Gran Maestro_ worry.  They simply made it
fast.

'Now, let us discuss the affairs of the Order,' the Colonel said.  'Are
we in the secret chamber?'

'We are,' said the _Gran Maestro_.  'Or I declare it to be such.'

'Continue,' said the Colonel.

The Order, which was a purely fictitious organization, had been founded
in a series of conversations between the _Gran Maestro_ and the
Colonel.  Its name was _El Ordine Militar, Nobile y Espirituoso de los
Caballeros de Brusadelli_.  The Colonel and the head waiter both spoke
Spanish and since that is the best language for founding orders, they
had used it in the naming of this one, which was named after a
particularly notorious multi-millionaire non-taxpaying profiteer of
Milan, who had, in the course of a dispute over property, accused his
young wife, publicly and legally through due process of law, of having
deprived him of his judgment through her extraordinary sexual demands.

'_Gran Maestro_,' the Colonel said.  'Have you heard from our Leader,
_The Reverend One_?'

'Not a word.  He is silent these days.'

'He must be thinking.'

'He must.'

'Perhaps he is meditating on new and more distinguished shameful acts.'

'Perhaps.  He has not given me any word.'

'But we can have confidence in him.'

'Until he dies,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'After that he can roast in
hell and we will revere his memory.'

'Giorgio,' the Colonel said.  'Give the _Gran Maestro_ another short
_Carpano_.'

'If it is your order,' the _Gran Maestro_ said, 'I can only obey.'

They touched glasses.

'Jackson,' the Colonel called.  'You're on the town.  You can sign here
for chow.  I don't want to see you until eleven hundred to-morrow in
the lobby, unless you get into trouble.  Do you have money?'

'Yes, sir,' Jackson said and thought, the old son of a bitch really is
as crazy as they say.  But he might have called me instead of shouting.

'I don't want to see you,' the Colonel said.

Jackson had entered the room and stood before him at a semblance of
attention.

'I'm tired of seeing you, because you worry and you don't have fun.
For Christ sake have yourself some fun.'

'Yes, sir.'

'You understand what I said?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Repeat it.'

'Ronald Jackson, T5 Serial Number 100678, will present himself in the
lobby of this Gritti Hotel at 11.00 to-morrow morning, I don't know the
date, sir, and will absent himself from the Colonel's sight and will
have some fun.  Or,' he added, 'will make every reasonable attempt to
attain that objective.'

'I'm sorry, Jackson,' the Colonel said.  'I'm a ----.'

'I beg to differ with the Colonel,' Jackson said.

'Thank you, Jackson,' the Colonel told him.  'Maybe I'm not.  I hope
you are correct.  Now muck off.  You've got a room here, or you should
have and you can sign for chow.  Now try and have some fun.'

'Yes, sir,' said Jackson.

When he was gone, the _Gran Maestro_ said to the Colonel, 'What is the
boy?  One of those _sad_ Americans?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'And by Jesus Christ we've got a lot of them.
Sad, self-righteous, over-fed and undertrained.  If they are
under-trained, it is my fault.  But we've got some good ones, too.'

'Do you think they would have done Grappa, Pasubio and the Basso Piave
as we did?'

'The good ones, yes.  Maybe better.  But you know, in our army, they
don't even shoot for self-inflicted wounds.'

'Jesus,' said the _Gran Maestro_.  He and the Colonel both remembered
the men who decided that they did not wish to die, not thinking that he
who dies on Thursday does not have to die on Friday and how one soldier
would wrap another's puttee-ed leg in a sandbag so there would be no
powder burns and loose off at his friend from as far a distance as he
figured he could hit the calf of the leg without hitting bone and then
fire twice over the parapet to alibi the shot.  They had this knowledge
shared between them and it was for this reason and for a true, good
hatred of all those who profited by war that they had founded the Order.

They knew, the two of them, who loved and respected each other, how
_poor_ boys who did not want to die, would share the contents of a
match-box to produce the infection that would keep them from the next
murderous frontal attack.

They knew about the other boys who put the big ten-centime pieces under
their arm-pits to produce jaundice.  And they knew, too, about the
richer boys who, in different cities, had paraffin injected under their
knee-caps so they would not have to go to the war.

They knew how garlic could be used to produce certain effects which
could absent a man from an attack and they knew all, or nearly all, of
the other tricks; for one had been a sergeant and the other a
lieutenant of infantry and they had fought on the three key points,
Pasubio, Grappa and the Piave, where it all made sense.

They had fought, too, in the earlier stupid butchery on the Isonzo and
the Carso.  But they were both ashamed of those who had ordered that
and they never thought about it except as a shameful, stupid thing to
be forgotten and the Colonel remembered it technically as something to
learn from.  So, now, they had founded the Order of Brusadelli; noble,
military and religious, and there were only five members.

'What is the news of the Order?' the Colonel asked the _Gran Maestro_.

'We have ascended the cook at the Magnificent to the rank of
Commendatore.  He comported himself as a man three times on his
fiftieth birthday.  I accepted his statement without corroboration.  He
never lied ever.'

'No.  He never lied.  But it is a topic on which you must be chary in
your credibility.'

'I believed him.  He looked ruined.'

'I can remember him when he was a tough kid and we called him the
cherry buster.'

'_Anch' io_.'

'Have you any concrete plans for the Order during the winter?'

'No, Supreme Commander.'

'Do you think we should give a homage to the Honourable Pacciardi?'

'As you wish.'

'Let's defer it,' the Colonel said.  He thought a moment, and signalled
for another dry Martini.

'Do you think we might organize a homage and manifestation in some
historic place such as San Marco or the old Church at Torcello in
favour of our Great Patron, Brusadelli, the Revered One?'

'I doubt if the religious authorities would permit it at this moment.'

'Then let us abandon all ideas of public manifestations for this
winter, and work within our cadres, for the good of the Order.'

'I think that is soundest,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'We will regroup.'

'And how are you, yourself?'

'Awful,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'I have low blood pressure, ulcers
and I owe money.'

'Are you happy?'

'All the time,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'I like my work very much and
I meet extraordinary and interesting characters, also many Belgians.
They are what we have instead of the locusts this year.  Formerly we
had the Germans.  What was it Caesar said, 'And the bravest of these
are the Belgians.'  But not the best dressed.  Do you agree?'

'I've seen them quite well costumed in Brussels,' the Colonel said.  'A
well-fed, gay capital.  Win, lose, or draw.'

'We should have fought in Flanders in the old days.'

'We were not born in the old days,' the Colonel said.  'So we
automatically could not have fought then.'

'I wish we could have fought with the Condottieri when all you had to
do was out-think them and they conceded.  You could think and I would
convey your orders.'

'We'd have to take a few towns for them to respect our thinking.'

'We would sack them if they defended them,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.
'What towns would you take?'

'Not this one,' the Colonel said.  'I'd take Vicenza, Bergamo and
Verona.  Not necessarily in that order.'

'You'd have to take two more.'

'I know,' the Colonel said.  He was a general now again and he was
happy.  'I figured that I'd by-pass Brescia.  It could fall of its own
weight.'

'And how are you, Supreme Commander?' the _Gran Maestro_ said, for this
taking of towns had pulled him out of his depth.

He was at home in his small house in Treviso, close to the fast-flowing
river under the old walls.  The weeds waved in the current and the fish
hung in the shelter of the weeds and rose to insects that touched the
water in the dusk.  He was at home, too, in all operations that did not
involve more than a company and understood them as clearly as he
understood the proper serving of a small dining-room; or a large
dining-room.

But when the Colonel became a general officer again, as he had once
been and thought in terms that were as far beyond him as calculus is
distant from a man who has only the knowledge of arithmetic, then he
was not at home and their contact was strained and he wished the
Colonel would return to things they both knew together when they were a
lieutenant and a sergeant.

'What would you do about Mantova?' the Colonel asked.

'I do not know, my Colonel.  I do not know whom you are fighting, nor
what forces are at your disposal.'

'I thought you said we were Condottieri.  Based on this town or on
Padova.'

'My Colonel,' the _Gran Maestro_ said, and he had diminished in no way,
'I know nothing, truly, about Condottieri.  Nor really how they fought
then.  I only said I would like to fight under you in such times.'

'There aren't any such times any more,' the Colonel said and the spell
was broken.

What the hell, maybe there never was any spell, the Colonel thought.
The hell with you, he said to himself.  Cut it out and be a human being
when you're half a hundred years old.

'Have another _Carpano_,' he said to the _Gran Maestro_.

'My Colonel, you will allow me to refuse because of the ulcers?'

'Yes.  Yes.  Of course.  Boy, what's your name, Giorgio?  Another dry
Martini.  _Secco, molto secco e doppio_.'

Breaking spells, he thought.  It is not my trade.  My trade is killing
armed men.  A spell should be armed if I'm to break it.  But we have
killed many things which were not armed.  All right, spell breaker,
retract.

'_Gran Maestro_,' he said.  'You are still _Gran Maestro_ and ---- the
Condottieri.'

'They were ---- many years ago, Supreme Commander.'

'Exactly,' the Colonel said.

But the spell was broken.

'I'll see you at dinner,' the Colonel said.  'What is there?'

'We will have anything you wish and what we do not have I will send out
for.'

'Do you have any fresh asparagus?'

'You know we cannot have it in these months.  It comes in April and
from Bassano.'

'Then you think of something and I'll eat it,' the Colonel said,

'How many will you be?' the Maitre d'Hotel asked.

'We'll be two,' the Colonel said.  'What time do you close the bistro?'

'We will serve dinner as late as you wish to eat, my Colonel.'

'I'll try to be in at a sound hour,' the Colonel said.  'Good-bye,
_Gran Maestro_,' he said and smiled and gave the _Gran Maestro_ his
crooked hand.

'Good-bye, Supreme Commander,' said the _Gran Maestro_ and the spell
was existent again and almost complete.

But it was not quite complete and the Colonel knew it and he thought:
why am I always a bastard and why can I not suspend this trade of arms
and be a kind and good man as I would have wished to be.

I try always to be just, but I am brusque and I am brutal and it is not
that I have erected the defence against brown-nosing my superiors and
brown-nosing the world.  I should be a better man with less wild boar
blood in the small time which remains.  We will try it out to-night, he
thought.  With whom, he thought and where, and God help me not to be
bad.

'Giorgio,' he said to the barman, who had a face as white as a leper,
but with no bulges and without the silver shine.

Giorgio did not really like the Colonel very much, or perhaps he was
simply from Piemonte and cared for no one truly; which was
understandable in cold people from a border province.  Borderers are
not trusters and the Colonel knew about this and expected nothing from
anyone that they did not have to give.

'Giorgio,' he said to the pale-faced barman.  'Write these down for me,
please.'

He went out, walking as he had always walked, with a slightly
exaggerated confidence, even when it was not needed and, in his always
renewed plan of being kind, decent and good, he greeted the concierge,
who was a friend, the assistant manager, who spoke Swahili and had been
a prisoner of war in Kenya and was a most amiable man, young, full of
juice, handsome, perhaps not yet a member of the Order, and experienced.

'And the _cavaliere ufficiale_ who manages this place?' he asked.  'My
friend?'

'He is not here,' the assistant manager said.  'For the moment,
naturally,' he added.

'Give him my compliments,' the Colonel said.  'And have somebody show
me to my room.'

'It is the usual room.  You still wish it?'

'Yes.  Have you taken care of the Sergeant?'

'He is well taken care of.'

'Good,' said the Colonel.

The Colonel proceeded to his room accompanied by the boy who carried
his bag.

'This way, my Colonel,' the boy said, when the elevator halted with
slight hydraulic inaccuracy at the top floor.

'Can't you run an elevator properly?' the Colonel asked.

'No, my Colonel,' the boy said.  'The current is not stable.'




Chapter VIII

The colonel said nothing and preceded the boy down the corridor.  It
was large, wide and high ceilinged and there was a long and
distinguished interval between the doors of the rooms on the side of
the Grand Canal.  Naturally, since it had been a palace, there were no
rooms without excellent views, except those which had been made for the
servants.

The Colonel found the walk long, although it was a very short one and
when the waiter, who served the room, appeared, short, dark and with
his glass eye in the left eye socket, gleaming, unable to smile his
full, true smile as he worked the big key in the lock, the Colonel
wished that the door would open more rapidly.

'Open it up,' he said.

'I will, my Colonel,' the waiter said.  'But you know these locks.'

Yes, the Colonel thought.  I know them, but I wish that he would get it
open.

'How are your family?' he said to the waiter, who had swung the door
wide so that the Colonel, now entered, was within the room with the
high, dark but well-mirrored armoire, the two good beds, the great
chandelier and the view, through the still closed windows, on to the
wind-beaten water of the Grand Canal.

The Canal was grey as steel now in the quick, failing, winter light and
the Colonel said, 'Arnaldo, open the windows.'

'There is much wind, my Colonel, and the room is badly heated due to
the lack of electric power.'

'Due to the lack of rainfall,' the Colonel said.  'Open the windows.
All of them.'

'As you wish, my Colonel.'

The waiter opened the windows and the north wind came into the room.

'Please call the desk and ask them to ring this number.'  The waiter
made the call while the Colonel was in the bathroom.

'The Contessa is not at home, my Colonel,' he said.  'They believe you
might find her at Harry's.'

'You find everything on earth at Harry's.'

'Yes, my Colonel.  Except, possibly, happiness.'

'I'll damn well find happiness, too,' the Colonel assured him.
'Happiness, as you know, is a movable feast.'

'I am aware of that,' the waiter said.  'I have brought Campari bitters
and a bottle of Gordon Gin.  May I make you a Campari with gin and
soda?'

'You're a good boy,' the Colonel said.  'Where did you bring them from.
The bar?'

'No.  I bought them while you were away so that you would not have to
spend money at the bar.  The bar is very costly.'

'I agree,' the Colonel agreed.  'But you should not use your own money
on such a project.'

'I took a chance.  We have both taken many.  The gin was 3200 lire and
is legitimate.  The Campari was 800.'

'You're a very good boy,' the Colonel told him.  'How were the ducks?'

'My wife still speaks of them.  We had never had wild ducks, since they
are of such expense, and outside of our way of life.  But one of our
neighbours told her how to prepare them and these same neighbours ate
them with us.  I never knew that anything could be so wonderful to eat.
When your teeth close on the small slice of meat it is an almost
unbelievable delight.'

'I think so, too.  There is nothing lovelier to eat than those fat
iron-curtain ducks.  You know their fly-way is through the great grain
fields of the Danube.  This is a splinter flight we have here, but they
always come the same way since before there were shot-guns.'

'I know nothing about shooting for sport,' the waiter said.  'We were
too poor.'

'But many people without money shoot in the Veneto.'

'Yes.  Of course.  One hears them shoot all night.  But we were poorer
than that.  We were poorer than you can know, my Colonel.'

'I think I can know.'

'Perhaps,' the waiter said.  'My wife also saved all the feathers and
she asked me to thank you.'

'If we have any luck the day after to-morrow, we'll get plenty.  The
big ducks with the green heads.  Tell your wife, with luck, there will
be good eating ducks, fat as pigs with what they have eaten from the
Russians and with beautiful feathers.'

'How do you feel about the Russians, if it is not indiscreet to ask, my
Colonel?'

'They are our potential enemy.  So, as a soldier, I am prepared to
fight them.  But I like them very much and I have never known finer
people nor people more as we are.'

'I have never had the good fortune to know them.'

'You will, boy.  You will.  Unless the Honourable Pacciardi stops them
on the line of the Piave, which is a river which no longer contains
water.  It has been siphoned off for hydro-electric projects.  Perhaps
the Honorable Pacciardi will fight there.  But I do not think he will
fight for long.'

'I do not know the Honourable Pacciardi.'

'I know him,' said the Colonel.

'Now ask them to ring Harry's and see if the Contessa is there.  If
not, have them ring the house again.'

The Colonel took the drink Arnaldo, the glass-eyed waiter, made him.
He did not want it and he knew that it was bad for him.

But he took it with his old wild-boar truculence, as he had taken
everything all of his life and he moved, still cat-like when he moved,
although it was an old cat now, over to the open window and looked out
on the great Canal which was now becoming as grey as though Degas had
painted it on one of his greyest days.

'Thanks very much for the drink,' the Colonel said and Arnaldo, who was
talking into the telephone, nodded and smiled his glass-eyed smile.

I wish he did not have to have that glass eye, the Colonel thought.  He
only loved people, he thought, who had fought or been mutilated.

Other people were fine and you liked them and were good friends; but
you only felt true tenderness and love for those who had been there and
had received the castigation that everyone receives who goes there long
enough.

So I'm a sucker for cripes, he thought, drinking the unwanted drink.
And any son of a bitch who has been hit solidly, as every man will be
if he stays, then I love him.

Yes, his other, good side said.  You love them.

I'd rather not love anyone, the Colonel thought.  I'd rather have fun.

And fun, his good side said to him, you have no fun when you do not
love.

All right.  I love more than any son of the great bitch alive, the
Colonel said, but not aloud.

Aloud, he said, 'Where are you getting on that call, Arnaldo?'

'Cipriani has not come in,' the waiter said.  'They are expecting him
at any moment and I am keeping the line open in case he arrives.'

'A costly procedure,' the Colonel said.  'Get me a reading on who's
there so we don't waste time.  I want to know exactly who is there.'

Arnaldo spoke guardedly into the mouthpiece of the telephone.

He covered the mouth of the phone with his hand and said, 'I am talking
to Ettore.  He says the Barone Alvarito is not there.  The Count Andrea
is there and he is rather drunk, Ettore says, but not too drunk for you
to have fun together.  The group of ladies that comes in each afternoon
are there and there is a Greek princess, that you know and several
people that you do not know.  Riff-raff from the American Consulate who
have stayed on since noon.'

'Tell him to call back when the riff-raff goes and I'll come over.'

Arnaldo spoke into the phone, then turned to the Colonel who was
looking out of the window at the Dome of the Dogana, 'Ettore says he
will try to move them, but he is afraid Cipriani will not like it.'

'Tell him not to move them.  They don't have to work this afternoon and
there is no reason why they should not get drunk like any other man.  I
just don't want to see them.'

'Ettore says he will call back.  He told me to tell you he thinks the
position will fall of its own weight.'

'Thank him for calling,' the Colonel said.

He watched a gondola working up the Canal against the wind and thought,
not with Americans drinking.  I know they are bored.  In this town,
too.  They are bored in this town.  I know the place is cold and their
wages are inadequate and what fuel costs.  I admire their wives, for
the valiant efforts they make to transport Keokuk to Venice, and their
children already speak Italian like little Venetians.  But no snapshots
to-day, Jack.  To-day we are giving the snapshots, the bar-room
confidences, the unwanted comradely drinks and the tedious woes of the
Consular services a miss.

'No second, third or fourth vice-consuls to-day, Arnaldo.'

'There are some very pleasant people from the Consulate.'

'Yeah,' the Colonel said.  'They had a hell of a nice consul here in
1918.  Everybody liked him.  I'll try to remember his name.'

'You go back a long way back, my Colonel.'

'I go back so damn far back that it isn't funny.'

'Do you remember everything from the old days?'

'Everything,' the Colonel said.  'Carroll was the man's name.'

'I have heard of him.'

'You weren't born then.'

'Do you think it is necessary to have been born at the time to know
about things that have happened in this town, my Colonel?'

'You're perfectly correct.  Tell me, does everybody always know about
everything that happens in this town?'

'Not everybody.  But nearly everybody,' the waiter said.  'After all,
sheets are sheets and someone has to change them and someone has to
wash them.  Naturally I do not refer to the sheets in a hotel such as
this.'

'I've had some damn good times in my life without sheets.'

'Naturally.  But the gondoliers, while they are the most co-operative
and, for me, the finest people that we have, speak among themselves.'

'Naturally.'

'Then the clergy.  While they would never violate the secrecy of the
confessional, talk among themselves.'

'It is to be expected.'

'Their housekeepers talk among themselves.'

'It is their right.'

'Then the waiters,' Arnaldo said.  'People talk at a table as though
the waiter were stone-deaf.  The waiter, according to his ethics, makes
no attempt to ever overhear a conversation.  But sometimes he cannot
escape from hearing.  Naturally, we have our own conversations among
ourselves.  Never in this hotel of course.  I could go on.'

'I believe I get the point.'

'Not to mention the coiffeurs and the hair-dressers.'

'And what's the news from the Rialto now?'

'You will get it all at Harry's except the part you figure in.'

'Do I figure?'

'Everyone knows everything.'

'Well, it's a damn pleasant story.'

'Some people don't understand the Torcello part.'

'I'm damned if I do sometimes myself.'

'How old are you, my Colonel, if it is not too indiscreet to ask?'

'Fifty plus one.  Why didn't you find out from the concierge?  I fill
out a slip there for the Questura.'

'I wanted to hear it from you yourself and to congratulate you.'

'I don't know what you are talking about.'

'Let me congratulate you anyway.'

'I can't accept it.'

'You are very well liked in this city.'

'Thank you.  That is a very great compliment.'

Just then the telephone buzzed.

'I'll take it,' the Colonel said and heard Ettore's voice say, 'Who
speaks?'

'Colonel Cantwell.'

'The position has fallen, my Colonel.'

'Which way did they go?'

'Towards the Piazza.'

'Good.  I will be there at once.'

'Do you want a table?'

'In the corner,' said the Colonel and hung up.

'I am off for Harry's.'

'Good hunting.'

'I hunt ducks day after tomorrow before first light in a botte in the
marshes.'

'It will be cold, too.'

'I dare say,' the Colonel said and put on his trench coat and looked at
his face in the glass of the long mirror as he put on his cap.

'An ugly face,' he said to the glass.  'Did you ever see a more ugly
face?'

'Yes,' said Arnaldo.  'Mine.  Every morning when I shave.'

'We both ought to shave in the dark,' the Colonel told him and went out
the door.




Chapter IX

As Colonel Cantwell stepped out of the door of the Gritti Palace Hotel
he came out into the last sunlight of that day.  There was still
sunlight on the opposite side of the Square but the gondoliers
preferred to be sheltered from the cold wind by lounging in the lee of
the Gritti, than to use the last remaining heat of the sun on the
wind-swept side of the Square.

After noting this, the Colonel turned to the right and walked along the
Square to the paved street which turned off on the right.  As he
turned, he stopped for a moment and looked at the church of Santa Maria
del Giglio.

What a fine, compact, and yet ready to be air-borne building, he
thought.  I never realized a small church could look like a P47.  Must
find out when it was built and who built it.  Damn, I wish I might walk
around this town all my life.  All my life, he thought.  What a gag
that is.  A gag to gag on.  A throttle to throttle you with.  Come on,
boy, he said to himself.  No horse named Morbid ever won a race.

Besides, he thought, as he looked in the windows of the various shops
he passed, the _charcuteri_ with the Parmesan cheeses and the hams from
San Daniele and the sausages _alla cacciatora_ and the bottles of good
Scotch whisky and real Gordon's gin, the cutlery store, an antique
dealer's with some good pieces and some old maps and prints, a
second-rate restaurant disguised expensively as one of the first class
and then came to the first bridge crossing a feeder canal with steps to
be climbed; I don't feel so badly.  There is only the buzzing.  I
remember when that started and I thought perhaps it was seven-year
locusts in the trees and I did not like to ask young Lowry but I did.
And he answered, 'No, General, I don't hear any crickets or seven-year
locusts.  The night is perfectly quiet except for the usual noises.'

Then, as he climbed, he felt the twinges and coming down the other
side, he saw two lovely looking girls.  They were beautiful and hatless
and poorly but chicly dressed, and they were talking very fast to each
other and the wind was blowing their hair as they climbed with their
long, easy striding Venetian legs and the Colonel said to himself, 'I'd
better quit window gazing along this street and make that next bridge
and two squares afterwards you turn due right and keep along it till
you are in Harry's.'

He did just that, twinging on the bridge, but walking with his same old
stride and only seeing, quickly, the people that he passed.  There's a
lot of oxygen in this air, he thought, as he faced into the wind and
breathed deeply.

Then he was pulling open the door of Harry's bar and was inside and he
had made it again and was at home.

At the bar a tall, very tall, man, with a ravaged face of great
breeding, merry blue eyes and the long, loose-coupled body of a buffalo
wolf said, 'My ancient and depraved Colonel.'

'My wicked Andrea.'

They embraced and the Colonel felt the rough texture of Andrea's
handsome tweed coat that must have been entering, at least, its
twentieth year.

'You look well, Andrea,' the Colonel said.

It was a lie and they both knew it.

'I am,' said Andrea, returning the lie.  'I must say I never felt
better.  You look extraordinarily well, yourself.'

'Thank you, Andrea.  Us healthy bastards shall inherit the earth.'

'Very good idea.  I must say I wouldn't mind inheriting something these
days.'

'You have no kick.  You'll inherit well over six feet four of it.'

'Six feet six,' said Andrea.  'You wicked old man.  Are you still
slaving away at _la vie militaire_?'

'I don't slave too hard at it,' the Colonel said.  'I'm down to shoot
at San Relajo.'

'I know.  But don't make jokes in Spanish at this hour.  Alvarito was
looking for you.  He said to tell you he'd be back.'

'Good.  Is your lovely wife and are the children well?'

'Absolutely, and they asked me to remember them to you if I saw you.
They're down in Rome.  There comes your girl.  Or one of your girls.'
He was so tall he could see into the now almost dark street, but this
was a girl you could recognize if it was much darker than it was at
this hour.

'Ask her to have a drink with us here before you carry her off to that
corner table.  Isn't she a lovely girl?'

'She is.'

Then she came into the room, shining in her youth and tall striding
beauty and the carelessness the wind had made of her hair.  She had a
pale, almost olive-coloured skin, a profile that could break your, or
anyone else's, heart and her dark hair, of an alive texture, hung down
over her shoulders.

'Hello, my great beauty,' the Colonel said.

'Oh, oh, hello,' she said.  'I thought I would miss you.  I am so sorry
to be late.'

Her voice was low and delicate and she spoke English with caution.

'_Ciao_, Andrea,' she said.  'How is Emily and are the children?'

'Probably just the same as when I answered that same question for you
at noon.'

'I am so sorry,' she said and blushed.  'I am so excited and I always
say the wrong things.  What should I say?  Have you had a good time
here all afternoon?'

'Yes,' said Andrea.  'With my old friend and severest critic.'

'Who is that?'

'Scotch whisky and water.'

'I suppose if he must tease me he must,' she said to the Colonel.  'But
you won't tease me, will you?'

'Take him over to that corner table and talk to him.  I'm tired of you
both.'

'I'm not tired of you,' the Colonel told him.  'But I think it is a
good idea.  Should we have a drink sitting down, Renata?'

'I'd love to if Andrea isn't angry.'

'I'm never angry.'

'Would you have a drink with us, Andrea?'

'No,' said Andrea.  'Get along to your table.  I'm sick of seeing it
unoccupied.'

'Good-bye, Carlo.  Thanks for the drink we didn't have.'

'_Ciao_, Ricardo,' Andrea said and that was all.

He turned his fine, long, tall back on them and looked into the mirror
that is placed behind bars so a man can tell when he is drinking too
much and decided that he did not like what he saw there.  'Ettore,' he
said.  'Please put this nonsense on my bill.'

He walked out after waiting carefully for his coat, swinging into it
and tipping the man who brought it exactly what he should be tipped
plus twenty per cent.

At the corner table, Renata said, 'Do you think we hurt his feelings?'

'No.  He loves you and he likes me.'

'Andrea is so nice.  And you're so nice.'

'Waiter,' the Colonel called; then asked, 'Do you want a dry Martini,
too?'

'Yes,' she said.  'I'd love one.'

'Two very dry Martinis,' the Colonel said.  'Montgomerys.  Fifteen to
one.'

The waiter, who had been in the desert, smiled and was gone and the
Colonel turned to Renata.

'You're nice,' he said.  'You're also very beautiful and lovely and I
love you.'

'You always say that and I don't know what it means but I like to hear
it.'

'How old are you now?'

'Nearly nineteen.  Why?'

'And you don't know what it means?'

'No.  Why should I?  Americans always say it to you before they go
away.  It seems to be necessary to them.  But I love you very much,
too, whatever that is.'

'Let's have a fine time,' the Colonel said.  'Let's not think about
anything at all.'

'I would like that.  I cannot think very well this time of day at any
rate.'

'Here are the drinks,' the Colonel said.  'Remember not to say,
chin-chin.'

'I remember that from before.  I never say chin-chin, nor here's to
you, nor bottoms up.'

'We just raise the glass to each other and, if you wish, we can touch
the edges.'

'I wish,' she said.

The Martinis were icy cold and true Montgomerys and, after touching the
edges, they felt them glow happily all through their upper bodies.

'And what have you been doing?' the Colonel asked.

'Nothing.  I still wait to go away to school.'

'Where now?'

'God knows.  Wherever I go to learn English.'

'Turn your head and raise your chin once for me.'

'You're not making fun?'

'No.  I'm not making fun.'

She turned her head and raised her chin, without vanity, nor coquetry
and the Colonel felt his heart turn over inside him, as though some
sleeping animal had rolled over in its burrow and frightened,
deliciously, the other animal sleeping close beside.

'Oh, you,' he said.  'Would you ever like to run for Queen of Heaven?'

'That would be sacrilegious.'

'Yes,' he said.  'I suppose it would and I withdraw the suggestion.'

'Richard,' she said.  'No, I can't say it.'

'Say it.'

'No.'

The Colonel thought, I order you to say it.  And she said, 'Please
never look at me like that.'

'I'm sorry,' the Colonel said.  'I had just slipped into my trade
unconsciously.'

'And if we were such a thing as married would you practise your trade
in the home?'

'No.  I swear it.  I never have.  Not in my heart.'

'With no one?'

'With no one of your sex.'

'I don't like that word your sex.  It sounds as though you were
practising your trade.'

'I throw my trade out of that God-damn window into the Grand Canal.'

'There,' she said.  'You see how quickly you practise it?'

'All right,' he said.  'I love you and my trade can gently leave.'

'Let me feel your hand,' she said.  'It's all right.  You can put it on
the table.'

'Thank you,' the Colonel said.

'Please don't,' she said.  'I wanted to feel it because all last week,
every night, or I think nearly every night, I dreamed about it and it
was a strange mixed-up dream and I dreamed it was the hand of Our Lord.'

'That's bad.  You oughtn't to do that.'

'I know it.  That's just what I dreamed.'

'You aren't on the junk, are you?'

'I don't know what you mean and please don't make fun when I tell you
something true.  I dreamed just as I say.'

'What did the hand do?'

'Nothing.  Or maybe that is not true.  Mostly it was just a hand.'

'Like this one?' The Colonel asked, looking at the mis-shapen hand with
distaste and remembering the two times that had made it that way.

'Not like.  It _was_ that one.  May I touch it carefully with my
fingers if it does not hurt?'

'It does not hurt.  Where it hurts is in the head, the legs and the
feet.  I don't believe there's any sensation in that hand.'

'You're wrong,' she said.  'Richard.  There is very much sensation in
that hand.'

'I don't like to look at it much.  You don't think we could skip it?'

'Of course.  But you don't have to dream about it.'

'No.  I have other dreams.'

'Yes.  I can imagine.  But I dream lately about this hand.  Now that I
have touched it carefully, we can talk about funny things if you like.
What is there funny we should talk about?'

'Let's look at the people and discuss them.'

'That's lovely,' she said.  'And we won't do it with malice.  Only with
our best wit.  Yours and mine.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'Waiter, _Ancora due Martini_.'

He did not like to call for Montgomerys in a tone that could be
overheard because there were two obvious Britishers at the next table.

The male might have been wounded, the Colonel thought, although, from
his looks, it seems unlikely.  But God help me to avoid brutality.  And
look at Renata's eyes, he thought.  They are probably the most
beautiful of all the beautiful things she has with the longest honest
lashes I have ever seen and she never uses them for anything except to
look at you honestly and straight.  What a damn wonderful girl and what
am I doing here anyway?  It is wicked.  She is your last and true and
only love, he thought, and that's not evil.  It is only unfortunate.
No, he thought, it is damned fortunate and you are very fortunate.

They sat at a small table in the corner of the room and on their right
there were four women at a larger table.  One of the women was in
mourning; a mourning so theatrical that it reminded the Colonel of the
Lady Diana Manners playing the nun in Max Reinhardt's 'The Miracle'.
This woman had an attractive, plump, naturally gay face and her
mourning was incongruous.

At the table there was another woman who had hair three times as white
as hair can be, the Colonel thought she, also, had a pleasant face.
There were two other women whose faces meant nothing to the Colonel.

'Are they lesbians?' he asked the girl.

'I do not know,' she said.  'They are all very nice people.'

'I should say they are lesbians.  But maybe they are just good friends.
Maybe they are both.  It means nothing to me and it was not a
criticism.'

'You are nice when you are gentle.'

'Do you suppose the word gentleman derives from a man who is gentle?'

'I do not know.' the girl said, and she ran her fingers very lightly
over the scarred hand.  'But I love you when you are gentle.'

'I'll try very hard to be gentle,' the Colonel said.  'Who do you
suppose that son of a bitch is at the table beyond them?'

'You don't stay gentle very long,' the girl said.  'Let us ask Ettore.'

They looked at the man at the third table.  He had a strange face like
an over-enlarged, disappointed weasel or ferret.  It looked as
pock-marked and as blemished as the mountains of the moon seen through
a cheap telescope and, the Colonel thought, it looked like Goebbels's
face, if Herr Goebbels had ever been in a plane that burned and not
been able to bale out before the fire reached him.

Above this face, which was ceaselessly peering, as though the answer
might be found by enough well directed glances and by queries, there
was black hair that seemed to have no connection with the human race.
The man looked as though he had been scalped and then the hair
replaced.  Very interesting, the Colonel thought.  Can he be a
compatriot?  Yes, he must.

A little spit ran out of the corner of his mouth as he spoke,
peeringly, with the elderly, wholesome looking woman who was with him.
She looks like anybody's mother in an illustration in _The Ladies' Home
Journal_, the Colonel thought.  _The Ladies' Home Journal_ was one of
the magazines received regularly at the Officers's Club in Trieste and
the Colonel looked through it when it came.  It is a wonderful
magazine, he thought, because it combines sexology and beautiful foods.
It makes me hungry both ways.

But who do you suppose that character is?  He looks like a caricature
of an American who has been run one half way through a meat chopper and
then been boiled, slightly, in oil.  I'm not being so gentle, he
thought.

Ettore, with his emaciated face and his love of joking and fundamental
and abiding disrespect, came over and the Colonel said, 'Who is that
spiritual character?'

Ettore shook his head.

The man was short and dark with glossy black hair that did not seem to
go with his strange face.  He looked, the Colonel thought, as though he
had forgotten to change his wig as he grew older.  Has a wonderful face
though, the Colonel thought.  Looks like some of the hills around
Verdun.  I don't suppose he could be Goebbels and he picked up that
face in the last days when they were all playing at Gotterdammerung.
_Komm' Susser Tod_, he thought.  Well they sure bought themselves a
nice big piece of Susser Tod at the end.

'You don't want a nice Susser Tod sandwich do you Miss Renata?'

'I don't think so,' the girl said.  'Though I love Bach and I am sure
Cipriani could make one.'

'I was not talking against Bach,' the Colonel said.

'I know it.'

'Hell,' the Colonel said.  'Bach was practically a co-belligerent.  As
you were,' he added.

'I don't think we have to talk against me.'

'Daughter,' the Colonel said.  'When will you learn that I might joke
against you because I love you?'

'Now,' she said.  'I've learned it.  But you know it's fun not to joke
too rough.'

'Good.  I've learned it.'

'How often do you think of me during the week?'

'All of the time.'

'No.  Tell me truly.'

'All of the time.  Truly.'

'Do you think it is this bad for everyone?'

'I wouldn't know,' the Colonel said.  'That's one of the things I would
not know.'

'I hope it's not this bad for everyone.  I had no idea it could be this
bad.'

'Well you know now.'

'Yes,' the girl said.  'I know now.  I know now and for keeps and for
always.  Is that the correct way to say it?'

'I know now is enough,' the Colonel said.  'Ettore, that character with
the inspiring face and the nice looking woman with him doesn't live at
the Gritti does he?'

'No,' Ettore said.  'He lives next door but he goes to the Gritti
sometimes to eat.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'It will be wonderful to see him if I should
ever be down-hearted.  Who is the woman with him?  His wife?  His
mother?  His daughter?'

'There you have me,' Ettore said.  'We haven't kept track of him in
Venice.  He has aroused neither love, hate, dislike, fear nor
suspicion.  Do you really want to know anything about him?  I could ask
Cipriani.'

'Let us skip him,' the girl said.  'Is that how you say it?'

'Let's skip him,' the Colonel said.

'When we have so little time, Richard.  He is rather a waste of time.'

'I was looking at him as at a drawing by Goya.  Faces are pictures,
too.'

'Look at mine and I will look at yours.  Please skip the man.  He
didn't come here to do anyone any harm.'

'Let me look at your face and you not look at mine.'

'No,' she said.  'That's not fair.  I have to remember yours all week.'

'And what do I do?' the Colonel asked her.

Ettore came over, unable to avoid conspiracy and, having gathered his
intelligence rapidly and as a Venetian should, said:

'My colleague who works at his hotel, says that he drinks three or four
highballs and then writes vastly and fluently far into the night.'

'I daresay that makes marvellous reading.'

'I daresay,' Ettore said.  'But it was hardly the method of Dante.'

'Dante was another _vieux con_,' the Colonel said.  'I mean as a man.
Not as a writer.'

'I agree,' Ettore said.  'I think you will find no one, outside of
Firenze, who has studied his life who would not agree.'

'Eff Florence,' the Colonel said.

'A difficult manoeuvre,' Ettore said.  'Many have attempted it but very
few have succeeded.  Why do you dislike it, my Colonel?'

'Too complicated to explain.  But it was the depot,' he said
_deposito_, 'of my old regiment when I was a boy.'

'That I can understand.  I have my own reasons for disliking it, too.
You know a good town?'

'Yes,' said the Colonel.  'This one.  A part of Milano; and Bologna.
And Bergamo.'

'Cipriani has a large store of vodka in case the Russians should come,'
Ettore said, loving to joke rough.

'They'll bring their own vodka, duty free.'

'Still I believe Cipriani is prepared for them.'

'Then he is the only man who is,' the Colonel said.  'Tell him not to
take any cheques from junior officers on the Bank of Odessa and thank
you for the data on my compatriot.  I won't take more of your time.'

Ettore left and the girl turned towards him and looked in his old steel
eyes and put both her hands on his bad one and said, 'You were quite
gentle.'

'And you are most beautiful and I love you.'

'It's nice to hear it anyway.'

'What are we going to do about dinner?'

'I will have to call my home and find out if I can come out.'

'Why do you look sad now?'

'Do I?'

'Yes.'

'I am not, really.  I am as happy as I ever am.  Truly.  Please believe
me, Richard.  But how would you like to be a girl nineteen years old in
love with a man over fifty years old that you knew was going to die?'

'You put it a little bluntly,' the Colonel said.  'But you are very
beautiful when you say it.'

'I never cry,' the girl said.  'Never.  I made a rule not to.  But I
would cry now.'

'Don't cry,' the Colonel said.  'I'm gentle now and the hell with the
rest of it.'

'Say once again that you love me.'

'I love you and I love you and I love you.'

'Will you do your best not to die?'

'Yes.'

'What did the doctor say?'

'So-so.'

'Not worse?'

'No,' he lied.

'Then let us have another Martini,' the girl said.  'You know I never
drank a Martini until we met.'

'I know.  But you drink them awfully well.'

'Shouldn't you take the medicine?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'I should take the medicine.'

'May I give it to you?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'You may give it to me.'

They continued to sit at the table in the corner and some people went
out and others came in.  The Colonel felt a little dizzy from the
medicine and he let it ride.  That's the way it always is, he thought.
To hell with it.

He saw the girl watching him and he smiled at her.  It was an old smile
that he had been using for fifty years, ever since he first smiled and
it was still as sound as your grandfather's Purdey shot-gun.  I guess
my older brother has that, he thought.  Well, he could always shoot
better than I could and he deserves it.

'Listen, Daughter,' he said.  'Don't be sorry for me.'

'I'm not.  Not at all.  I just love you.'

'It isn't much of a trade is it?'  He said _oficio_ instead of trade,
because they spoke Spanish together, too, when they left French and
when they did not wish to speak English before other people.  Spanish
is a rough language, the Colonel thought, rougher than a corncob
sometimes.  But you can say what you mean in it and make it stick.

'_Es un oficio bastante malo_,' he repeated, 'loving me.'

'Yes.  But it is the only one I have.'

'Don't you write any more poetry?'

'It was young girl poetry.  Like young girl painting.  Everyone is
talented at a certain age.'

At what age do you become old in this country, the Colonel thought.  No
one is ever old in Venice, but they grow up very fast.  I grew up very
rapidly in the Veneto myself and I was never as old as I was at
twenty-one.

'How is your mother?' he asked lovingly.

'She is very well.  She does not receive and she sees almost no one
because of her sorrow.'

'Do you think she would mind if we had a baby?'

'I don't know.  She is very intelligent, you know.  But I would have to
marry someone, I suppose.  I don't really want to.'

'We could be married.'

'No,' she said.  'I thought it over and I thought we should not.  It is
just a decision as the one about crying.'

'Maybe you make wrong decisions.  Christ knows I've made a few and too
many men are dead from when I was wrong.'

'I think, perhaps, you exaggerate.  I don't believe you made many wrong
decisions.'

'Not many,' the Colonel said.  'But enough.  Three is plenty in my
trade and I made all three.'

'I'd like to know about them.'

'They'd bore you,' the Colonel told her.  'They beat the hell out of me
to remember them.  So what would they do to some outsider?'

'Am I an outsider?'

'No.  You're my true love.  My last and only and true love.'

'Did you make them early or late?  The decisions.'

'I made them early.  In the middle.  And late.'

'Wouldn't you tell me about them?  I would like to have a share in your
sad trade.'

'The hell with them,' the Colonel said.  'They were made and they've
all been paid for.  Only you can't pay for that.'

'Can you tell me about that and why?'

'No,' the Colonel said.  And that was the end of that.

'Then let's have fun.'

'Let's,' the Colonel said.  'With our one and only life.'

'Maybe there are others.  Other lives.'

'I don't think so,' the Colonel said.  'Turn your head sideways,
beauty.'

'Like this?'

'Like that,' the Colonel said.  'Exactly like that.'

So, the Colonel thought, here we come into the last round and I do not
know even the number of the round.  I have loved but three women and
have lost them thrice.

You lose them the same way you lose a battalion; by errors of judgment;
orders that are impossible to fulfil and through impossible conditions.
Also through brutality.

I have lost three battalions in my life and three women and now I have
a fourth and loveliest and where the hell does it end?

You tell me, General, and, incidentally, while we are discussing the
matter and it is frank discussion of the situation and in no sense a
Council of War, as you have so often pointed out to me General: GENERAL
WHERE IS YOUR CAVALRY?

I have thought so, he said to himself.  The Commanding Officer does not
know where his cavalry is and his cavalry are not completely accurate
as to their situation, nor their mission and they will, some of them,
_enough_, muck off as cavalry have always mucked off in all the wars
since they, the Cavalry, had the big horses.

'Beauty,' he said, '_Ma très chère et bien aimée_.  I am very dull and
I am sorry.'

'You are never dull, to me, and I love you and I only wish we could be
cheerful to-night.'

'We damn well will be,' said the Colonel.  'Do you know anything
particular we should be cheerful about?'

'We might be cheerful about us, and about the town.  You've often been
very cheerful.'

'Yes,' the Colonel agreed.  'I have been.'

'Don't you think we could do it once more?'

'Sure.  Of course.  Why not?'

'Do you see the boy with the wave in his hair, that is natural, and he
only pushes it a little, skilfully, to be more handsome?'

'I see him,' the Colonel said.

'He is a very good painter, but he has false teeth in front because he
was a little bit _pédéraste_ once and other _pédérastes_ attacked him
one night on the Lido when there was a full moon.'

'How old are you?'

'I will be nineteen.'

'How do you know this?'

'I know it from the Gondoliere.  This boy is a very good painter, for
now.  There aren't any really good painters now.  But with false teeth,
now, in his twenty-fifth year, what a thing.'

'I love you very truly,' the Colonel said.

'I love you very truly, too.  Whatever that means in American.  I also
love you in Italian, against all my judgment and all of my wishes.'

'We shouldn't wish for too God-damn much,' the Colonel said.  'Because
we are always liable to get it.'

'I agree,' she said.  'But I would like to get what I wish for now.'

Neither of them said anything and then the girl said, 'That boy, he is
a man now, of course, and goes with very many women to hide what he is,
painted my portrait once.  You can have it if you like.'

'Thank you,' the Colonel said.  'I would love it.'

'It is very romantic.  My hair is twice as long as it has ever been and
I look as though I were rising from the sea without the head wet.
Actually, you rise from the sea with the hair very flat and coming to
points at the end.  It is almost the look of a very nearly dead rat.
But Daddy paid him adequately for the portrait, and, while it is not
truly me, it is the way you like to think of me.'

'I think of you when you come from the sea too.'

'Of course.  Very ugly.  But you might like to have this portrait for a
souvenir.'

'Your lovely mother would not mind?'

'Mummy would not mind.  She would be glad to be rid of it, I think.  We
have better pictures in the house.'

'I love you and your mother both very much.'

'I must tell her,' the girl said.

'Do you think that pock-marked jerk is really a writer?'

'Yes.  If Ettore says so.  He loves to joke but he does not lie.
Richard, what is a jerk?  Tell me truly.'

'It is a little rough to state.  But I think it means a man who has
never worked at his trade (_oficio_) truly, and is presumptuous in some
annoying way.'

'I must learn to use the term properly.'

'Don't use it,' the Colonel said.

Then the Colonel asked, 'When do I get the portrait?'

'To-night if you wish it.  I'll have someone wrap it and send it from
the house.  Where will you hang it?'

'In my quarters.'

'And no one will come in and make remarks and speak badly of me?'

'No.  They damn well will not.  Also I'll tell them it is a portrait of
my daughter.'

'Did you ever have a daughter?'

'No.  I always wanted one.'

'I can be your daughter as well as everything else.'

'That would be incest.'

'I don't think that would be so terrible in a city as old as this and
that has seen what this city has seen.'

'Listen, Daughter.'

'Good,' she said.  'That was fine.  I liked it.'

'All right,' the Colonel said and his voice was thickened a little.  'I
liked it, too.'

'Do you see now why I lore you when I know better than to do it?'

'Look, Daughter.  Where should we dine?'

'Wherever you like.'

'Would you eat at the Gritti?'

'Of course.'

'Then call the house and ask for permission.'

'No.  I decided not to ask permission but to send word where I was
dining.  So they would not worry.'

'But do you really prefer the Gritti?'

'I do.  Because it is a lovely restaurant and it is where you live and
anyone can look at us that wants to.'

'When did you get like that?'

'I have always been like that.  I have never cared what anyone thought,
ever.  Nor have I ever done anything that I was ashamed of except tell
lies when I was a little girl and be unkind to people.'

'I wish we could be married and have five sons,' the Colonel said.

'So do I,' the girl said.  'And send them to the five corners of the
world.'

'Are there five corners to the world?'

'I don't know,' she said.  'It sounded as though there were when I said
it.  And now we are having run again, aren't we?'

'Yes, Daughter,' the Colonel said.

'Say it again.  Just as you said it.'

'Yes, Daughter.'

'Oh,' she said.  'People must be very complicated.  Please may I take
your hand?'

'It's so damned ugly and I dislike looking at it.'

'You don't know about your hand.'

'That's a matter of opinion,' he said.  'I'd say you were wrong,
Daughter.'

'Maybe I am wrong.  But we're having fun again and whatever the bad
thing was is gone now.'

'It's gone the way the mist is burned off the hollows in broken ground
when the sun comes out,' the Colonel said.  'And you're the sun.'

'I want to be the moon, too.'

'You are,' the Colonel told her.  'Also any particular planet that you
wish to be and I will give you an accurate location of the planet.
Christ, Daughter, you can be a God-damn constellation if you like.
Only that's an airplane.'

'I'll be the moon.  She has many troubles, too.'

'Yes.  Her sorrows come regularly.  But she always fills before she
wanes.'

'She looks so sad to me sometimes across the Canal, that I cannot stand
it.'

'She's been around a long time,' the Colonel said.

'Do you think we should have one more Montgomery?' the girl asked and
the Colonel noticed that the British were gone.

He had been noticing nothing but her lovely face.  I'll get killed
sometime that way, he thought.  On the other hand it is a form of
concentration I suppose.  But it is damned careless.

'Yes,' he said.  'Why not?'

'They make me feel very good,' the girl said.

'They have a certain effect on me, too, the way Cipriani makes them.'

'Cipriani is very intelligent.'

'He's more than that.  He's able.'

'Some day he'll own all Venice.'

'Not quite all,' the Colonel disagreed.  'He'll never own you.'

'No,' she said.  'Nor will anyone else unless you want me.'

'I want you, Daughter.  But I don't want to own you.'

'I know it,' the girl said.  'And that's one more reason why I love
you.'

'Let's get Ettore and have him call up your house.  You can tell them
about the portrait.'

'You are quite correct.  If you want the portrait to-night, I must
speak to the butler to have it wrapped and sent.  I will also ask to
speak to Mummy and tell her where we are dining, and, if you like, I
will ask her permission.'

'No,' the Colonel said.  'Ettore, two Montgomerys, super Montgomerys,
with garlic olives, not the big ones, and please call the home of this
lady and let her know when you have completed the communication.  And
all of this as rapidly as possible.'

'Yes, my Colonel.'

'Now, Daughter, let us resume the having of the fun.'

'It was resumed when you spoke,' she said.




Chapter X

They were walking, now, along the right side of the street that led to
the Gritti.  The wind was at their backs and it blew the girl's hair
forward.  The wind parted her hair in the back and blew it forward
about her face.  They were looking in the shop windows and the girl
stopped in front of the lighted window of a jewellery shop.

There were many good pieces of old jewellery in the window and they
stood and looked at them and pointed out the best ones to each other,
unclasping their hands to do so.

'Is there anything you really want?  I could get it in the morning.
Cipriani would loan me the money.'

'No,' she said.  'I do not want anything but I notice that you never
give me presents.'

'You are much richer than I am.  I bring you small things from the PX
and I buy you drinks and meals.'

'And take me in gondolas and to lovely places in the country.'

'I never thought you wanted presents of hard stones.'

'I don't.  It is just the thought of giving and then one looks at them
and thinks about them when they are worn.'

'I'm learning,' the Colonel said.  'But what could I buy you on Army
pay that would be like your square emeralds?'

'But don't you see.  I inherited them.  They came from my grandmother,
and she had them from her mother who had them from her mother.  Do you
think it is the same to wear stones that come from dead people?'

'I never thought about it.'

'You can have them if you like, if you like stones.  To me they are
only something to wear like a dress from Paris.  You don't like to wear
your dress uniform, do you?'

'No.'

'You don't like to carry a sword, do you?'

'No, repeat, no.'

'You are not that kind of a soldier and I am not that sort of girl.
But some time give me something lasting that I can wear and be happy
each time I wear it.'

'I see,' the Colonel said.  'And I will.'

'You learn fast about things you do not know,' the girl said.  'And you
make lovely quick decisions.  I would like you to have the emeralds and
you could keep them in your pocket like a lucky piece, and feel them if
you were lonely.'

'I don't put my hands much in my pockets when I'm working.  I usually
twirl a stick, or something, or point things out with a pencil.'

'But you could put your hand in your pocket only once in a long time
and feel them.'

'I'm not lonely when I'm working.  I have to think too hard to ever be
lonely.'

'But you are not working now.'

'No.  Only preparing the best way to be overrun.'

'I'm going to give them to you anyway.  I'm quite sure Mummy will
understand.  Also I won't need to tell her for quite a long time.  She
keeps no check on my things.  I'm sure my maid would never tell her.'

'I don't think I should take them.'

'You should, please, to give me pleasure.'

'I'm not sure it's honourable.'

'That is like not being sure whether you are a virgin.  What you do to
give pleasure to another whom you love is most honourable.'

'All right,' the Colonel said.  'I will take them for better or for
worse.'

'Now you say thank you,' the girl said and slipped them into his pocket
as quickly and ably as a jewel thief might.  'I brought them with me
because I have been thinking and deciding about this all week.'

'I thought you thought about my hand.'

'Don't be surly, Richard.  And _you_ should never be stupid.  It is
your hand you touch them with.  Didn't you think of that?'

'No.  And I was stupid.  What would you like from that window?'

'I would like that small Negro with the ebony face and the turban made
of chip diamonds with the small ruby on the crown of the turban.  I
should wear it as a pin.  Everyone wore them in the old days in this
city and the faces were those of their confidential servants.  I have
coveted this for a long time, but I wanted you to give it to me.'

'I'll send it in the morning.'

'No.  Give it to me when we have lunch before you go.'

'Right,' the Colonel said.

'Now we must walk or we will be too late for dinner.'

They started to walk, arm through arm, and as they went up the first
bridge the wind lashed at them.

When the twinge came, the Colonel said to himself, the hell with that.

'Richard,' the girl said.  'Put your hand in your pocket to please me
and feel them.'

The Colonel did.

'They feel wonderful,' he said.




Chapter XI

They came in, out of the wind and the cold, through the main entrance
of the Gritti Palace Hotel, into the light and warmth of the lobby.

'Good evening, Contessa,' the concierge said.  'Good evening, my
Colonel.  It must be cold outside.'

'It is,' the Colonel said, and did not add any of the rough or obscene
phrases about the extent of the cold, or the force of the wind, that he
could ordinarily have employed, for their mutual pleasure when
speaking, alone, with the concierge.

As they entered the long hallway that led to the big stairs and to the
elevator, leaving, on your right, the entrance to the bar, the doorway
on to the Grand Canal, and the entrance to the dining-room, the _Gran
Maestro_ came out of the bar.

He was wearing a formal white jacket, cut long, and he smiled at them
and said, 'Good evening, my Countess.  Good evening, my Colonel.'

'_Gran Maestro_,' the Colonel said.

The _Gran Maestro_ smiled and, still bowing, said, 'We are dining in
the bar at the far end.  There is no one here now in the winter time
and the dining-room is too big.  I have saved your table.  We have a
very fine lobster if you would like him to commence with.'

'Is he really fresh?'

'I saw him this morning when he came from the market in a basket.  He
was alive and a dark green and completely unfriendly.'

'Would you like lobster, Daughter, to start your dinner?'

The Colonel was conscious of using the word, and so was the _Gran
Maestro_, and so was the girl.  But to each one it meant a different
thing.

'I wanted to have him for you in case any _pescecani_ came in.  They
are down now to gamble at the Lido.  I was not trying to sell him.'

'I would love some lobster,' the girl said.  'Cold, and with
mayonnaise.  The mayonnaise rather stiff.'  She said this in Italian.

'It isn't too expensive?' she said to the Colonel, seriously.

'_Ay hija mia_,' the Colonel said.

'Feel in your right pocket,' she said.

'I'll see that he is not too expensive,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'Or
I'll buy him myself.  I could get him quite easily with a week's wages.'

'Sold to TRUST,' the Colonel said, this being the code designation of
the task force occupying Trieste.  'He only costs me a day's wages.'

'Put your hand in your right hand pocket and feel very rich,' the girl
said.

The _Gran Maestro_ had sensed this was a private joke and had gone;
silently.  He was happy about the girl, whom he respected and admired,
and he was happy for his Colonel.

'I am rich,' the Colonel said.  'But if you tease me about them, I will
give them back, and on the linen tablecloth, and in public.'

He was teasing rough in his turn; throwing in the counter-attack
without even thinking.

'No, you won't,' she said.  'Because you love them already.'

'I would take anything I love and throw it off the highest cliff you
ever saw and not wait to hear it bounce.'

'No, you wouldn't,' the girl said.  'You would not throw me off any
high cliffs.'

'No,' the Colonel agreed.  'And forgive me for talking badly.'

'You didn't talk very badly and I didn't believe it anyway,' the girl
told him.  'Now should I go to the women's room to comb my hair and
make myself presentable, or should I come up to your room?'

'Which do you wish?'

'To come to your room, of course, and see how you live and how things
are there.'

'What about the hotel?'

'Everything is known in Venice anyway.  But it is also known who my
family are and that I am a good girl.  Also they know it is you and it
is I.  We have some credit to exhaust.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'By stairs or elevator?'

'By elevator,' she said, and he heard the change in her voice.  'You
can call a boy or we can run it ourselves.'

'We run it ourselves,' the Colonel said.  'I checked out on elevators
long ago.'

It was a good ride with a slight bump, and a rectification at the end,
and the Colonel thought: Checked out, eh?  You better be checked out
again.

The corridor was now not simply beautiful, but exciting, and putting
the key into the lock was not a simple process, but a rite.

'Here it is,' the Colonel said when he swung the door open.  'What
there is of it.'

'It is charming,' the girl said.  'But it is awfully cold with the
windows open.'

'I'll close them.'

'No, please.  Leave them open if you like it that way.'

The Colonel kissed her and felt her wonderful, long, young, lithe and
properly built body against his own body, which was hard and good, but
beat-up, and as he kissed her he thought of nothing.

They kissed for a long time, standing straight, and kissing true, in
the cold of the open windows that were on to the Grand Canal.

'Oh,' she said.  Then, 'Oh.'

'We owe nothing,' the Colonel said.  'Not a thing.'

'Will you marry me and will we have the five sons?'

'I will!  I will!'

'The thing is that, would you?'

'Of course.'

'Kiss me once again and make the buttons of your uniform hurt me but
not too much.'

They stood there and kissed each other true.  'I have a disappointment
for you, Richard,' she said.  'I have a disappointment about
everything.'

She said it as a flat statement and it came to the Colonel in the same
way as a message came from one of the three battalions, when the
battalion commander spoke the absolute truth and told you the worst.

'You are positive?'

'Yes.'

'My poor Daughter,' he said.

Now there was nothing dark about the word and she was his daughter,
truly, and he pitied her and loved her.

'No matter,' he said.  'You comb yourself and make a new mouth and all
that, and we will have a good dinner.'

'Say once more, first, that you love me and make the buttons very
tight.'

'I love you,' the Colonel said quite formally.

Then he whispered into her ear as gently as he knew how to whisper, as
his whisper was when they are fifteen feet away and you are a young
lieutenant on a patrol, 'I love you only, my best and last and only and
one true love.'

'Good,' she said, and kissed him hard so he could feel the sweet salt
of the blood inside his lip.  And I like that too, he thought.

'Now I will comb my hair and make my mouth new and you can watch me.'

'Do you want me to shut the windows?'

'No,' she said.  'We will do it all in the cold.'

'Who do you love?'

'You,' she said.  'And we don't have too much luck, do we?'

'I don't know,' the Colonel said.  'Go ahead and comb your hair.'

The Colonel went into the bathroom to wash up for dinner.  The bathroom
was the only disappointing part of the room.  Due to the exigencies of
the Gritti having been built as a palace, there had been no site for
bathrooms at the time of building, and, later, when they were
introduced, they had been built down the corridor and those entitled to
use them gave due warning beforehand and water was heated and towels
laid out.

This bathroom had been cut, arbitrarily, from a corner of the room and
it was a defensive, rather than an attacking bathroom, the Colonel
felt.  Washing, and forced to look in the mirror to check any traces of
lipstick, he regarded his face.

It looks as though it had been cut out of wood by an indifferent
craftsman, he thought.

He looked at the different welts and ridges that had come before they
had plastic surgery, and at the thin, only to be observed by the
initiate, lines of the excellent plastic operations after head wounds.

Well, that is what I have to offer as a _gueule_ or a _façade_, he
thought1 It is a damn poor offer.  The only thing is that it is tanned,
and that takes some of the curse off of it.  But, Christ what an ugly
man.

He did not notice the old used steel of his eyes nor the small long
extending laugh wrinkles at the corners of his eyes, nor that his
broken nose was like a gladiator's in the oldest statues.  Nor did he
notice his basically kind mouth which could be truly ruthless.

The hell with you, he said to the mirror.  You beat-up, miserable.
Should we rejoin the ladles?

He went out from the bathroom into the room, and he was as young as at
his first attack.  Every worthless thing had been left in the bathroom.
As always, he thought.  That's the place for it.

_Où sont les neiges d'antan?  Où sont les neiges d'autrefois?  Dans le
pissoir toute la chose comme ça._

The girl, whose first name was Renata, had the doors of the tall
armoire open.  They were all mirrored inside and she was combing her
hair.

She was not combing it for vanity, nor to do to the Colonel what she
knew it could and would do.  She was combing it with difficulty and
without respect, and, since it was very heavy hair and as alive as the
hair of peasants, or the hair of the beauties of the great nobility, it
was resistant to the comb.

'The wind made it very tangled,' she said.  'Do you love me still?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'May I help you?'

'No, I've done it all my life.'

'You could stand sidewise.'

'No.  All contours are for our five sons and for your head to rest on.'

'I was only thinking of the face,' the Colonel said.  'But thank you
for calling my attention.  My attention has been faulty again.'

'I am over bold.'

'No,' the Colonel said.  'In America, they make such things of wire and
of sponge-rubber, such as you use in the seats of tanks.  You never
know there, whether there is any truth in the matter, unless you are a
bad boy, as I am.'

'Here it is not that way,' she said, and, with the comb, swung her now
parted hair forward so that it came below the line of her cheek and,
slanting back, hung over her shoulders.

'Do you like it neat?'

'It's not too neat but it is damn lovely.'

'I could put it up and all that sort of thing if you value neatness.
But I cannot manage hairpins and it seems so silly.'  Her voice was so
lovely and it always reminded him of Pablo Casals playing the 'cello
that it made him feel as a wound does that you think you cannot bear.
But you can bear anything, he thought.

'I love you very much the way you are,' the Colonel said.  'And you are
the most beautiful woman I have ever known, or seen, ever in paintings
by good painters.'

'I wonder why the portrait has not come.'

'The portrait is lovely to have,' the Colonel said, and now he was a
General again without thinking of it.  'But it is like skinning a dead
horse.'

'Please don't be rough,' the girl said.  'I don't feel at all like
being rough to-night.'

'I slipped into the jargon of my _sale mètier_.'

'No,' she said.  'Please put your arms around me, gently and well.
Please.  It is not a dirty trade.  It is the oldest and the best,
although most people who practise it are unworthy.'

He held her as tight as he could without hurting and she said, 'I would
not have you be a lawyer nor a priest.  Nor sell things.  Nor be a
great success.  I love you to be in your trade and I love you.  Please
whisper to me if you wish.'

The Colonel whispered; holding her tight, and with his heart broken,
honestly and fairly, in his whisper that was as barely audible as a
silent dog whistle heard close to the ear, 'I love you, devil.  And
you're my daughter, too.  And I don't care about our losses because the
moon is our mother and our father.  And now let's go down to dinner.'

He whispered this last so low that it was inaudible to anyone who did
not love you.

'Yes,' the girl said.  'Yes.  But kiss me once more first.'




Chapter XII

They were at their table in the far corner of the bar, where the
Colonel had both his flanks covered, and he rested solidly against the
corner of the room.  The _Gran Maestro_ knew about this, since he had
been an excellent sergeant in a good company of infantry, in a
first-rate regiment, and he would no more have seated his Colonel in
the middle of a room than he would have taken up a stupid defensive
position.

'The lobster,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.

The lobster was imposing.  He was double the size a lobster should be,
and his unfriendliness had gone with the boiling, so that now he looked
a monument to his dead self; complete with protruding eyes and his
delicate, far-extended antennae that were for knowing what rather
stupid eyes could not tell him.

He looks a little bit like Georgie Patton, the Colonel thought.  But he
probably never cried in his life when he was moved.

'Do you think that he will be tough?' he asked the girl in Italian.

'No,' the _Gran Maestro_ assured them, still bowing with the lobster.
'He's truly not tough.  He's only big.  You know the type.'

'All right,' the Colonel said.  'Serve him.'

'And what will you drink?'

'What do you want, Daughter?'

'What you want?'

'Capri Bianco,' the Colonel said.  'Secco and really cold.'

'I have it ready,' said the _Gran Maestro_.

'We are having fun,' the girl said.  'We are having it again and
without sorrow.  Isn't he an imposing lobster?'

'He is,' the Colonel answered.  'And he better damn well be tender.'

'He will be,' the girl told him.  'The _Gran Maestro_ doesn't lie.
Isn't it wonderful to have people who do not lie?'

'Very wonderful and quite rare,' the Colonel said.  'I was thinking
just now of a man named Georgie Patton who possibly never told the
truth in his life.'

'Do you ever lie?'

'I've lied four times.  But each time I was very tired.  That's not an
excuse,' he added.

'I lied a lot when I was a little girl.  But mostly it was making up
stories.  Or I hope so.  But I have never lied to my own advantage.'

'I have,' said the Colonel.  'Four times.'

'Would you have been a general if you had not lied?'

'If I had lied as others lied, I would have been a three-star general.'

'Would it make you happier to be a three-star general?'

'No,' said the Colonel.  'It would not.'

'Put your right hand, your real hand, in your pocket once and tell me
how you feel.'

The Colonel did so.

'Wonderful,' he said.  'But I have to give them back you know.'

'No.  Please, no.'

'We won't go into it now.'

Just then the lobster was served.

It was tender, with the peculiar slippery grace of that kicking muscle
which is the tail, and the claws were excellent; neither too thin, nor
too fat.

'A lobster fills with the moon,' the Colonel told the girl.  'When the
moon is dark he is not worth eating.'

'I didn't know that.'

'I think it may be because, with the full moon, he feeds all night.  Or
maybe it is that the full moon brings him feed.'

'They come from the Dalmatian coast do they not?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'That's your rich coast in fish.  Maybe I
should say our rich coast.'

'Say it,' the girl said.  'You don't know how important things that are
said are.'

'They are a damn sight more important when you put them on paper.'

'No,' the girl said.  'I don't agree.  The paper means nothing unless
you say them in your heart.'

'And what if you haven't a heart, or your heart is worthless?'

'You have a heart and it is not worthless.'

I would sure as hell like to trade it in on a new one, the Colonel
thought.  I do not see why that one, of all the muscles, should fail
me.  But he said nothing of this, and put his hand in his pocket.

'They feel wonderful,' he said.  'And you look wonderful.'

'Thank you,' she said.  'I will remember that all week.'

'You could always just look in the glass.'

'The mirror bores me,' she said.  'Putting on lipstick and moving your
lips over each other to get it spread properly and combing your too
heavy hair is not a life for a woman, or even a girl alone, who loves
someone.  When you want to be the moon and various stars and live with
your man and have five sons, looking at yourself in the mirror and
doing the artifices of a woman is not very exciting.'

'Then let us be married at once.'

'No,' she said.  'I had to make a decision about that, as about the
other different things.  All week long is my time to make decisions.'

'I make them, too,' the Colonel told her.  'But I am very vulnerable on
this.'

'Let's not talk about it.  It makes a sweet hurt, but I think we would
do better to find out what the _Gran Maestro_ has for meat.  Please
drink your wine.  You haven't touched it.'

'I'll touch it now,' the Colonel said.  He did and it was pale and cold
like the wines of Greece, but not resinous, and its body was as full
and as lovely as that of Renata.

'It's very like you.'

'Yes.  I know.  That's why I wanted you to taste it.'

'I'm tasting it,' the Colonel said.  'Now I will drink a full glass.'

'You're a good man.'

'Thank you,' the Colonel said.  'I'll remember that all week and try to
be one.'  Then he said, '_Gran Maestro_.'

When the _Gran Maestro_ came over, happy, conspiratorial, and ignoring
his ulcers, the Colonel asked him, 'What sort of meat have you that is
worth our eating?'

'I'm not quite sure I know,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'But I will
check.  Your compatriot is over there in hearing distance.  He would
not let me seat him in the far corner.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'We'll give him something to write about.'

'He writes every night, you know.  I've heard that from one of my
colleagues at his hotel.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'That shows that he is industrious even if
he has outlived his talents.'

'We are all industrious,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.

'In different ways.'

'I will go and check on what there actually is among the meats.'

'Check carefully.'

'I am industrious.'

'You are also damn sagacious.'

The _Gran Maestro_ was gone and the girl said, 'He is a lovely man and
I love how fond he is of you.'

'We are good friends,' the Colonel said.  'I hope he has a good steak
for you.'

'There is one very good steak,' the _Gran Maestro_ said, reappearing.

'You take it, Daughter.  I get them all the time at the mess.  Do you
want it rare?'

'Quite rare, please.'

'_Al sangue_,' the Colonel said, 'as John said when he spoke to the
waiter in French.  _Crudo, bleu_, or just make it very rare.'

'It's rare,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'And you, my Colonel?'

'The scaloppine with Marsala, and the cauliflower braised with butter.
Plus an artichoke vinaigrette if you can find one.  What do you want,
Daughter?'

'Mashed potatoes and a plain salad.'

'You're a growing girl.'

'Yes.  But I should not grow too much nor in the wrong directions.'

'I think that handles it,' the Colonel said.  'What about a fiasco of
Valpolicella?'

'We don't have fiascos.  This is a good hotel, you know.  It comes in
bottles.'

'I forgot,' the Colonel said.  'Do you remember when it cost thirty
centesimi the litre?'

'And we would throw the empty fiascos at the station guards from the
troop trains?'

'And we would throw all the left over grenades away and bounce them
down the hillside coming back from the Grappa?'

'And they would think there was a break-through when they would see the
bursts and you never shaved, and we wore the _fiamme nere_ on the grey,
open jackets with the grey sweaters?'

'And I drank grappa and could not even feel the taste?'

'We must have been tough then,' the Colonel said.

'We were tough then,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'We were bad boys then,
and you were the worst of the bad boys.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'I think we were rather bad boys.  You
forgive this will you, Daughter?'

'You haven't a picture of then, have you?'

'No.  There weren't any pictures except with Mr. d'Annunzio in them.
Also most of the people turned out badly.'

'Except for us,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'Now I must go and see how
the steak marches.'

The Colonel, who was a sub-lieutenant again now, riding in a camion,
his face dust, until only his metallic eyes showed, and they were
red-rimmed and sore, sat thinking.

The three key points, he thought.  The massif of Grappa with Assalone
and Pertica and the hill I do not remember the name of on the right.
That was where I grew up, he thought, and all the nights I woke
sweating, dreaming I would not be able to get them out of the trucks.
They should not have gotten out, ever, of course.  But what a trade it
is.

'In our army, you know,' he told the girl, 'practically no generals
have ever fought.  It is quite strange and the top organization
dislikes those who have fought.'

'Do generals really fight?'

'Oh, yes.  When they are captains and lieutenants.  Later, except in
retreats, it is rather stupid.'

'Did you fight much?  I know you did.  But tell me.'

'I fought enough to be classified as a fool by the great thinkers.'

'Tell me.'

'When I was a boy, I fought against Erwin Rommel half way from Cortina
to the Grappa, where we held.  He was a captain then and I was an
acting captain; really a sub-lieutenant.'

'Did you know him?'

'No.  Not until after the war when we could talk together.  He was very
nice and I liked him.  We used to ski together.'

'Did you like many Germans?'

'Very many.  Ernst Udet I liked the best.'

'But they were in the wrong.'

'Of course.  But who has not been?'

'I never could like them or take such a tolerant attitude as you do,
since they killed my father and burned our villa on the Brenta and the
day I saw a German officer shooting pigeons with a shotgun in the
Piazzo San Marco.'

'I understand,' the Colonel said.  'But please, Daughter, you try to
understand my attitude too.  When we have killed so many we can afford
to be kind.'

'How many have you killed?'

'One hundred and twenty-two sures.  Not counting possibles.'

'You had no remorse?'

'Never.'

'Nor bad dreams about it?'

'Nor bad dreams.  But usually strange ones.  Combat dreams, always, for
a while after combat.  But then strange dreams about places mostly.  We
live by accidents of terrain, you know.  And terrain is what remains in
the dreaming part of your mind.'

'Don't you ever dream about me?'

'I try to.  But I can't.'

'Maybe the portrait will help.'

'I hope so,' the Colonel said.  'Please don't forget to remind me to
give back the stones.'

'Please don't be cruel.'

'I have my small necessities of honour in the same proportions as we
have our great and enveloping love.  You cannot have the one without
the other.'

'But you could give me privileges.'

'You have them,' the Colonel said.  'The stones are in my pocket.'

The _Gran Maestro_ came then with the steak and the scaloppine and the
vegetables.  They were brought by a sleek-headed boy who believed in
nothing; but was trying hard to be a good second waiter.  He was a
member of the Order.  The _Gran Maestro_ served adroitly and with
respect both for the food, and those that were to eat it.

'Now eat,' he said.

'Uncork that Valpolicella,' he said to the boy who had the eyes of an
unbelieving spaniel.

'What do you have on that character?' the Colonel asked him, referring
to his pitted compatriot, sitting chawing at his food, while the
elderly woman with him ate with suburban grace.

'You should tell me.  Not me you.'

'I never saw him before to-day,' the Colonel said.  'He's hard to take
with food.'

'He condescends to me.  He speaks bad Italian assiduously.  He goes
everywhere in Baedeker, and he has no taste in either food or wine.
The woman is nice.  I believe she is his aunt.  But I have no real
information.'

'He looks like something we could do without.'

'I believe we could.  In a pinch.'

'Does he speak of us?'

'He asked me who you were.  He was familiar with the Contessa's name
and had book-visited several palaces that had belonged to the family.
He was impressed by your name, Madam, which I gave to impress him.'

'Do you think he will put us in a book?'

'I'm sure of it.  He puts everything in a book.'

'We ought to be in a book,' the Colonel said.  'Would you mind,
Daughter?'

'Of course not,' the girl said.  'But I'd rather Dante wrote it.'

'Dante isn't around,' the Colonel said.

'Can you tell me anything about the war?' the girl asked.  'Anything
that I should be permitted to know?'

'Sure.  Anything you like.'

'What was General Eisenhower like?'

'Strictly the Epworth League.  Probably that is unjust too.  Also
complicated by various other influences.  An excellent politician.
Political General.  Very able at it.'

'The other leaders?'

'Let us not name them.  They've named themselves enough in their
memoirs.  Mostly extremely plausible out of something called the Rotary
Club that you would never have heard of.  In this club, they have
enamelled buttons with their first names and you are fined if you call
them by their proper names.  Never fought.  Ever.'

'Were there no good ones?'

'Yes, many.  Bradley, the schoolmaster, and many others.  Give you
Lightning Joe as a good one.  Very good.'

'Who was he?'

'Commanded the Seventh Corps when I was there.  Very sound.  Rapid.
Accurate.  Now chief of staff.'

'But what about the great leaders we heard about like the Generals
Montgomery and Patton?'

'Forget them, Daughter.  Monty was a character who needed fifteen to
one to move, and then moved tardily.'

'I always supposed he was a great General.'

'He was not,' the Colonel said.  'The worst part was he knew it.  I
have seen him come into an hotel and change from his proper uniform
into a crowd-catching kit to go out in the evening to animate the
populace.'

'Do you dislike him?'

'No.  I simply think he is a British General.  Whatever that means.
And don't you use the term.'

'But he beat General Rommel.'

'Yes.  And you don't think anyone else had softened him up?  And who
can't win with fifteen to one?  When we fought here, when we were boys,
the _Gran Maestro_ and I, we won for one whole year with three to four
against one and we won each one.  Three main bad ones.  That is why we
can make jokes and not be solemn.  We had something over one hundred
and forty thousand dead that year.  That is why we can speak gaily and
without pomposity.'

'It is such a sad science; if it is a science,' the girl said.  'I hate
the war monuments, though I respect them.'

'I do not like them either.  Nor the process which led to their
construction.  Have you ever seen that end of the thing?'

'No.  But I would like to know.'

'Better not know,' the Colonel said.  'Eat your steak before it gets
cold and forgive me for talking about my trade.'

'I hate it but I love it.'

'I believe we share the same emotions,' the Colonel said.  'But what is
my pitted compatriot thinking three tables down?'

'About his next book, or about what it says in Baedeker.'

'Should we go and ride in a gondola in the wind after we have dined?'

'That would be lovely.'

'Should we tell the pitted man that we are going?  I think he has the
same pits on his heart and in his soul and maybe in his curiosity.'

'We tell him nothing,' the girl said.  'The _Gran Maestro_ can convey
him any information we wish.'

Then she chewed well and solidly on her steak and said, 'Do you think
it is true that men make their own faces after fifty.'

'I hope not.  Because I would not sign for mine.'

'You,' she said.  'You.'

'Is the steak good?' the Colonel asked.

'It's wonderful.  How are your scaloppine?'

'Very tender and the sauce is not at all sweet.  Do you like the
vegetables?'

'The cauliflower is almost crisp; like celery.'

'We should have some celery.  But I don't think there is any or the
_Gran Maestro_ would have brought it.'

'Don't we have fun with food?  Imagine if we could eat together always.'

'I've suggested it.'

'Let's not talk about that.'

'All right,' the Colonel said.  'I've made a decision too.  I'm going
to chuck the army and live in this town, very simply, on my retirement
pay.'

'That's wonderful.  How do you look in civilian clothes?'

'You've seen me.'

'I know it, my dear.  I said it for a joke.  You make rough jokes
sometimes too, you know.'

'I'll look all right.  That is if you have a tailor here who can cut
clothes.'

'There isn't one here, but there is in Rome.  Can we drive together to
Rome to get the clothes?'

'Yes.  And we will live outside the town at Viterbo and only go in for
the fittings and for dinner in the evening.  Then we'll drive back in
the night.'

'Will we see cinema people and speak about them with candour and
perhaps not have a drink with them?'

'We'll see them by the thousands.'

'Will we see them being married for the second and third time and then
being blessed by the Pope?'

'If you go in for that kind of thing.'

'I don't,' the girl said.  'That's one reason that I cannot marry you.'

'I see,' the Colonel said.  'Thank you.'

'But I will love you, whatever that means, and you and I know what it
means very well, as long as either of us is alive and after.'

'I don't think you can love very much after you, yourself, are dead,'
the Colonel said.

He started to eat the artichoke taking a leaf at a time, and dipping
them, heavy side down, into the deep saucer of _sauce vinaigrette_.

'I don't know whether you can either,' the girl said.  'But I will try.
Don't you feel better to be loved?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'I feel as though I were out on some
bare-assed hill where it was too rocky to dig, and the rocks all solid,
but with nothing jutting, and no bulges, and all of a sudden instead of
being there naked, I was armoured.  Armoured and the eighty-eights not
there.'

'You should tell that to our writer friend with the craters of the moon
face so he could write it to-night.'

'I ought to tell it to Dante if he was around,' the Colonel, suddenly
gone as rough as the sea when a line squall comes up, said.  'I'd tell
him what I'd do if I were shifted, or ascended, into an armoured
vehicle under such circumstances.'

Just then the Barone Alvarito came into the dining-room.  He was
looking for them and, being a hunter, he saw them instantly.

He came over to the table and kissed Renata's hand, saying, 'Ciao,
Renata.'  He was almost tall, beautifully built in his town clothes,
and he was the shyest man the Colonel had ever known.  He was not shy
from ignorance, nor from being ill at ease, nor from any defect.  He
was basically shy, as certain animals are, such as the Bongo that you
will never see in the jungle, and that must be hunted with dogs.

'My Colonel,' he said.  He smiled as only the truly shy can smile.

It was not the easy grin of the confident, nor the quick slashing smile
of the extremely durable and the wicked.  It had no relation with the
poised, intently used smile of the courtesan or the politician.  It was
the strange, rare smile which rises from the deep, dark pit, deeper
than a well, deep as a deep mine, that is within them.

'I can only stay a moment.  I came to tell you that it looks quite good
for the shoot.  The ducks are coming in heavily from the north.  There
are many big ducks.  The ones you like,' he smiled again.

'Sit down, Alvarito.  Please.'

'No,' the Barone Alvarito said.  'We can meet at the garage at
two-thirty if you like?  You have your car?'

'Yes.'

'That makes it very good.  Leaving at that hour, we will have time to
see the ducks in the evening.'

'Splendid,' the Colonel said.

'Ciao, then, Renata.  Good-bye, my Colonel.  Until two-thirty.'

'We knew each other as children,' the girl said.  'But he was about
three years older.  He was born very old.'

'Yes.  I know.  He is a good friend of mine.'

'Do you think your compatriot has looked him up in Baedeker?'

'I wouldn't know,' the Colonel said.  '_Gran Maestro_,' he asked, 'did
my illustrious compatriot look up the _Barone_ in Baedeker?'

'Truly, my Colonel.  I have not seen him pull his Baedeker during the
meal.'

'Give him full marks,' the Colonel said.  'Now look.  I believe that
the Valpolicella is better when it is newer.  It is not a _grand vin_
and bottling it and putting years on it only adds sediment.  Do you
agree?'

'I agree.'

'Then what should we do?'

'My Colonel, you know that in a Great Hotel, wine must cost money.  You
cannot get Pinard at the Ritz.  But I suggest that we get several
fiascos of the good.  You can say they come from the Contessa Renata's
estates and are a gift.  Then I will have them decanted for you.  This
way, we will have better wine and make an impressive saving.  I will
explain it to the manager if you like.  He is a very good man.'

'Explain it to him,' the Colonel said.  'He's not a man who drinks
labels either.'

'Agreed.'

'In the meantime you might as well drink this.  It is very good you
know.'

'It is,' the Colonel said.  'But it isn't Chambertin.'

'What did we use to drink?'

'Anything,' the Colonel said.  'But now I seek perfection.  Or, rather,
not absolute perfection, but perfection for my money.'

'I seek it, too,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'But rather vainly.'

'What do you want for the end of the meal?'

'Cheese,' the Colonel said.  'What do you want, Daughter?'

The girl had been quiet and a little withdrawn, since she had seen
Alvarito.  Something was going on in her mind, and it was an excellent
mind.  But, momentarily, she was not with them.

'Cheese,' she said.  'Please.'

'What cheese?'

'Bring them all and we'll look at them,' the Colonel said.

The _Gran Maestro_ left and the Colonel said, 'What's the matter,
Daughter?'

'Nothing.  Never anything.  Always nothing.'

'You might as well pull out of it.  We haven't time for such luxuries.'

'No.  I agree.  We will devote ourselves to the cheese.'

'Do I have to take it like a corn cob?'

'No,' she said, not understanding the colloquialism, but understanding
exactly what was meant, since it was she who had been doing the
thinking.  'Put your right hand in your pocket.'

'Good,' the Colonel said.  'I will.'

He put his right hand in his pocket and felt what was there, first with
the tips of his fingers, and then with the insides of his fingers, and
then with the palm of his hand; his split hand.

'I'm sorry,' she said.  'And now we begin the good part of it again.
We will dedicate ourselves to the cheese with happiness.'

'Excellent,' the Colonel said.  'I wonder what cheeses he has?'

'Tell me about the last war,' the girl said.  'Then we will ride in our
gondola in the cold wind.'

'It was not very interesting,' the Colonel said.  'To us, of course,
such things are always interesting.  But there were only three, maybe
four, phases that really interested me.'

'Why?'

'We were fighting a beaten enemy whose communications had been
destroyed.  We destroyed many divisions on paper, but they were ghost
divisions.  Not real ones.  They had been destroyed by our tactical
aviation before they ever got up.  It was only really difficult in
Normandy, due to the terrain, and when we made the break for Georgie
Patton's armour to go through and held it open on both sides.'

'How do you make a break for armour to go through?  Tell me, please.'

'First you fight to take a town that controls all the main roads.  Call
the town St. Lo.  Then you have to open up the roads by taking other
towns and villages.  The enemy has a main line of resistance, but he
cannot bring up his divisions to counter-attack because the
fighter-bombers catch them on the roads.  Does this bore you?  It bores
the hell out of me.'

'It does not bore me.  I never heard it said understandably before.'

'Thank you,' the Colonel said.  'Are you sure you want more of the sad
science?'

'Please,' she said.  'I love you, you know, and I would like to share
it with you.'

'Nobody shares this trade with anybody,' the Colonel told her.  'I'm
just telling you how it works.  I can insert anecdotes to make it
interesting, or plausible.'

'Insert some, please.'

'The taking of Paris was nothing,' the Colonel said.  'It was only an
emotional experience.  Not a military operation.  We killed a number of
typists and the screen the Germans had left, as they always do, to
cover their withdrawal.  I suppose they figured they were not going to
need a hell of a lot of office workers any more and they left them as
soldiers.'

'Was it not a great thing?'

'The people of Leclerc, another jerk of the third or fourth water,
whose death I celebrated with a magnum of Perrier-Jouet Brut 1942, shot
a great number of rounds to make it seem important and because we had
given them what they had to shoot with.  But it was not important.'

'Did you take part in it?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'I think I could safely say, yes.'

'Did you have no great impressions of it?  After all, it was Paris and
not everyone has taken it.'

'The French, themselves, had taken it four days before.  But the grand
plan of what we called SHAEF, Supreme, get that word, Headquarters of
the Allied Expeditionary Forces, which included all the military
politicians of the rear, and who wore a badge of shame in the form of a
flaming something, while we wore a four-leafed clover as a designation,
and for luck, had a master plan for the envelopment of the city.  So we
could not simply take it.

'Also we had to wait for the possible arrival of General or Field
Marshal Bernard Law Montgomery who was unable to close, even, the gap
at Falaise and found the going rather sticky and could not quite get
there on time.'

'You must have missed him,' the girl said.

'Oh, we did,' the Colonel said.  'No end.'

'But was there nothing noble or truly happy about it?'

'Surely,' the Colonel told her.  'We fought from Bas Meudon, and then
the Porte de Saint Cloud, through streets I knew and loved and we had
no deads and did as little damage as possible.  At the Etoile I took
Elsa Maxwell's butler prisoner.  It was a very complicated operation.
He had been denounced as a Japanese sniper.  A new thing.  Several
Parisians were alleged to have been killed by him.  So we sent three
men to the roof where he had taken refuge and he was an Indo-China boy.'

'I begin to understand a little.  But it is disheartening.'

'It is always disheartening as hell.  But you are not supposed to have
a heart in this trade.'

'But do you think it was the same in the time of the Grand Captains?'

'I am quite sure it was worse.'

'But you got your hand honourably?'

'Yes.  Very honourably.  On a rocky, bare-assed hill.'

'Please let me feel it,' she said.

'Just be careful around the centre,' the Colonel said.  'It's split
there and it still cracks open.'

'You ought to write,' the girl said.  'I mean it truly.  So someone
would know about such things.'

'No,' the Colonel disagreed.  'I have not the talent for it and I know
too much.  Almost any liar writes more convincingly than a man who was
there.'

'But other soldiers wrote.'

'Yes.  Maurice de Saxe.  Frederick the Great.  Mr. T'sun Su.'

'But soldiers of our time.'

'You use the word our with facility.  I like it though.'

'But didn't many modern soldiers write?'

'Many.  But did you ever read them?'

'No.  I have read mostly the classics and I read the illustrated papers
for the scandals.  Also, I read your letters.'

'Burn them,' the Colonel said.  'They are worthless.'

'Please.  Don't be rough.'

'I won't.  What can I tell you that won't bore you?'

'Tell me about when you were a General.'

'Oh, that,' he said and motioned to the _Gran Maestro_ to bring
champagne.  It was Roederer Brut '42 and he loved it.

'When you are a General you live in a trailer and your Chief of Staff
lives in a trailer, and you have bourbon whisky when other people do
not have it.  Your Gs live in the C.P.  I'd tell you what Gs are, but
it would bore you.  I'd tell you about G1, G2, G3, G4, G5 and on the
other side there is always Kraut-6.  But it would bore you.  On the
other hand, you have a map covered with plastic material, and on this
you have three regiments composed of three battalions each.  It is all
marked in coloured pencil.

'You have boundary lines so that when the battalions cross their
boundaries they will not then fight each other.  Each battalion is
composed of five companies.  All should be good, but some are good, and
some are not so good.  Also you have divisional artillery and a
battalion of tanks and many spare parts.  You live by co-ordinates.'

He paused while the _Gran Maestro_ poured the Roederer Brut '42.

'From Corps,' he translated, unlovingly, _cuerpo d'Armata_, 'they tell
you what you must do, and then you decide how to do it.  You dictate
the orders or, most often, you give them by telephone.  You ream out
people you respect, to make them do what you know is fairly impossible,
but is ordered.  Also, you have to think hard, stay awake late and get
up early.'

'And you won't write about this?  Not even to please me?'

'No,' said the Colonel.  'Boys who were sensitive and cracked and kept
all their valid first impressions of their day of battle, or their
three days, or even their four, write books.  They are good books but
can be dull if you have been there.  Then others write to profit
quickly from the war they never fought in.  The ones who ran back to
tell the news.  The news is hardly exact.  But they ran quickly with
it.  Professional writers who had jobs that prevented them from
fighting wrote of combat that they could not understand, as though they
had been there.  I do not know what category of sin that comes under.

'Also a nylon-smooth captain of the Navy who could not command a
cat-boat wrote about the intimate side of the truly Big Picture.
Everybody will write their book sooner or later.  We might even draw a
good one.  But I don't write, Daughter.'

He motioned for the _Gran Maestro_ to fill the glasses.

'_Gran Maestro_,' he said.  'Do you like to fight?'

'No.'

'But we fought?'

'Yes.  Too much.'

'How is your health?'

'Wonderful except for the ulcers and a small cardiac condition.'

'No,' the Colonel said, and his heart rose and he felt it choke him.
'You only told me about the ulcers.'

'Well, you know now,' the _Gran Maestro_ said and did not finish the
sentence and he smiled his best and clearest smile that came as solid
as the sun rises.

'How many times?'

The _Gran Maestro_ held up two fingers as a man might do giving odds
where he had credit, and all the betting was on the nod.

'I'm ahead of you,' the Colonel said.  'But let's not be macabre.  Ask
Donna Renata if she wishes more of this excellent wine.'

'You did not tell me there were more,' the girl said.  'You owe it to
me to tell me.'

'There has been nothing since we were together last.'

'Do you think it breaks for me?  If so, I would come and simply be with
you and care for you.'

'It's just a muscle,' the Colonel said.  'Only it is the main muscle.
It works as perfectly as a Rolex Oyster Perpetual.  The trouble is you
cannot send it to the Rolex representative when it goes wrong.  When it
stops, you just do not know the time.  You're dead.'

'Don't please talk about it.'

'You asked me,' the Colonel said.

'And that pitted man with the caricature face?  He has no such thing?'

'Of course not,' the Colonel told her.  'If he is a mediocre writer he
will live for ever.'

'But you're not a writer.  How do you know this?'

'No,' the Colonel said.  'By the grace of God.  But I've read several
books.  We have a lot of time to read when we are unmarried.  Not as
much as the merchant marine maybe.  But plenty.  I can tell one writer
from another and I tell you that a mediocre writer has a long span of
life.  They ought to all draw longevity pay.'

'Could you tell me any anecdotes, and we stop talking about this, which
is my true sorrow?'

'I can tell you hundreds of them.  All true.'

'Tell me just one.  Then we will finish this wine and then go in the
gondola.'

'Do you think you will be warm enough?'

'Oh, I'm sure I will.'

'I don't know what to tell you,' the Colonel said.  'Everything about
war bores those who have not made it.  Except the tales of the liars.'

'I would like to know about the taking of Paris.'

'Why?  Because I told you that you looked like Marie Antoinette in the
tumbril?'

'No.  I was complimented by that and I know we are a little alike in
profile.  But I have never been in any tumbril, and I would like to
hear about Paris.  When you love someone and he is your hero, you like
to hear about the places and the things.'

'Please turn your head,' the Colonel said, 'and I will tell you.  _Gran
Maestro_ is there any more in that wretched bottle?'

'No,' the _Gran Maestro_ answered.

'Then bring another.'

'I have one already iced.'

'Good.  Serve it.  Now, Daughter, we parted from the column of the
General Leclerc at Clamart.  They went to Montrouge and the Porte
d'Orleans and we went directly to Bas Meudon and secured the bridge of
the Porte de Saint Cloud.  Is this too technical and does it bore you?'

'No.'

'It would be better with a map.'

'Go on.'

'We secured the bridge and established a bridgehead on the other side
of the river and we threw the Germans, living and dead, who had
defended the bridge, into the Seine River,' he stopped.  'It was a
token defence of course.  They should have blown it.  We threw all
these Germans into the River Seine.  They were nearly all office
workers, I believe.'

'Go on.'

'The next morning, we were informed that the Germans had strong points
at various places, and artillery on Mount Valerien, and that tanks were
roaming the streets.  A portion of this was true.  We were also
requested not to enter too rapidly as the General Leclerc was to take
the city.  I complied with this request and entered as slowly as I
could.'

'How do you do that?'

'You hold up your attack two hours and you drink champagne whenever it
is offered to you by patriots, collaborators or enthusiasts.'

'But was there nothing wonderful nor great, the way it is in books?'

'Of course.  There was the city itself.  The people were very happy.
Old general officers were walking about in their moth-balled uniforms.
We were very happy, too, not to have to fight.'

'Did you not have to fight at all?'

'Only three times.  Then not seriously.'

'But was that all you had to fight to take such a city?'

'Daughter, we fought twelve times from Ranbouillet to enter the city.
But only two of them were worth describing as fights.  Those at Toussus
le Noble and at Le Buc.  The rest was the necessary garnishing of a
dish.  I really did not need to fight at all except at those two
places.'

'Tell me some true things about fighting.'

'Tell me you love me.'

'I love you,' the girl said.  'You can publish it in the _Gazzettina_
if you like.  I love your hard, flat body and your strange eyes that
frighten me when they become wicked.  I love your hand and all your
other wounded places.'

'I better try to tell you something pretty good,' the Colonel said.
'First I can tell you that I love you, Period.'

'Why don't you buy some good glass?' the girl asked, suddenly.  'We
could go to Murano together.'

'I don't know anything about glass.'

'I could teach you.  It would be fun.'

'We lead too nomadic a life for good glass.'

'But when you retire and live here.'

'We'll get some then.'

'I wish that that was now.'

'So do I, except that I go duck shooting to-morrow and that to-night is
to-night.'

'Can I come duck shooting?'

'Only if Alvarito asks you.'

'I can make him ask me.'

'I doubt that.'

'It isn't polite to doubt what your daughter says when she is old
enough not to lie.'

'All right, Daughter.  I withdraw the doubt.'

'Thank you.  For that I will not go and be a nuisance.  I will stay in
Venice and go to Mass with Mother and my aunt and my great-aunt and
visit my poors.  I am an only child so I have many duties.'

'I always wondered what you did.'

'That's what I do.  Also, I'll have my maid wash my head and give me a
manicure and a pedicure.'

'You can't do that because the shoot is on Sunday.'

'Then I'll do that on Monday.  On Sunday, I will read all the
illustrated papers including the outrageous ones.'

'Maybe they'll have pictures of Miss Bergman.  Do you still want to be
like her?'

'Not any more,' the girl said.  'I want to be like me only much, much
better and I want to have you love me.'

'Also,' she said suddenly and un-maskingly, 'I want to be like you.
Can I be like you a little while to-night?'

'Of course,' the Colonel said.  'In what town are we anyway?'

'Venice,' she said.  'The best town, I think.'

'I quite agree.  And thank you for not asking me for more war episodes.'

'Oh, you are going to have to tell them to me later.'

'_Have to_?' the Colonel said, and the cruelty and resolution showed in
his strange eyes as clearly as when the hooded muzzle of the gun of a
tank swings towards you.

'Did you say _have to_, Daughter?'

'I said it.  But I did not mean it in that way.  Or, if I did wrong, I
am sorry.  I meant will you please tell me more true episodes later?
And explain me the things I do not understand?'

'You can use _have to_ if you want, Daughter.  The hell with it.'

He smiled and his eyes were as kind as they ever were, which was not
too kind, as he knew.  But there was nothing now that he could do about
it except to try to be kind to his last and true and only love.

'I don't really mind, Daughter.  Please believe me.  I know about
command and, at your age, I used to take considerable pleasure in
exercising it.'

'But I don't want to command,' the girl said.  In spite of her
resolution not to cry, her eyes were wet.  'I wish to serve you.'

'I know.  But you wish to command, too.  There's nothing wrong in that.
All people such as us have it.'

'Thank you for the such as us.'

'It wasn't hard to say,' the Colonel said.  'Daughter,' he added.

Just then the concierge came to the table and said, 'Excuse me, my
Colonel.  There is a man outside, I believe he is a servant of yours,
my lady, with quite a large package which he says is for the Colonel.
Should I keep it in the storeroom or have it sent to your room?'

'To my room,' the Colonel said.

'Please,' the girl said.  'Can't we look at it here?  We don't care
about anyone here, do we?'

'Have it unwrapped and brought in here.'

'Very good.'

'Later, you may have it taken with great care to my room and have it
wrapped, solidly, for transport at noon to-morrow.'

'Very good, my Colonel.'

'Are you excited to see it?' the girl asked.

'Very,' said the Colonel.  '_Gran Maestro_, some more of that Roederer,
please, and please place a chair in such a position that we may view a
portrait.  We are devotees of the pictorial arts.'

'There's no more Roederer cold,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'But if you
would like some Perrier-Jouet----'

'Bring it,' the Colonel said and added, 'Please.'

'I don't talk like Georgie Patton,' the Colonel told her.  'I don't
have to.  And besides he's dead.'

'Poor man.'

'Yes.  Poor man all his life.  Although quite rich in money and with a
lot of armour.'

'Do you have anything against armour?'

'Yes.  Most of the people inside of it.  It makes men into bullies
which is the first step towards cowardice; true cowardice, I mean.
Perhaps it is a little complicated by claustrophobia.'

Then he looked at her and smiled and regretted taking her beyond her
depth, as you might take a new swimmer on a shallow, shelving beach,
into too deep water; and he sought to reassure her.

'You forgive me, Daughter.  Much of what I say is unjust.  But it is
truer than the things that you will read in Generals' memoirs.  After a
man gets one star, or more, the truth becomes as difficult for him to
attain as the Holy Grail was in our ancestors' time.'

'But you were a general officer.'

'Not for too damn long,' the Colonel said.  'Now captains,' the General
said, 'they know the exact truth and they can mostly tell it to you.
If they can't, you reclassify them.'

'Would you reclassify me if I lied?'

'It would depend on what you lied about.'

'I'm not going to lie about anything.  I don't want to be reclassified.
It sounds horrible.'

'It is,' the Colonel said.  'And you send them back to have it done to
them with eleven different copies of why it should be done, every one
of which you sign.'

'Did you reclassify many?'

'Plenty.'

The concierge came into the room with the portrait, carrying it in its
big frame, much as a ship moves when she is carrying too much sail.

'Get two chairs,' the Colonel said to the second waiter, 'and put them
there.  See that the canvas does not touch the chairs.  And hold it so
it does not slip.'

Then to the girl he said, 'We'll have to change that frame.'

'I know,' she said.  'It was not my choice.  Take it unframed with you
and we'll choose a good frame next week.  Now look at it.  Not at the
frame.  At what it says, or does not say, of me.'

It was a beautiful portrait; neither cold, nor snobbish, nor stylized,
nor modern.  It was the way you would want your girl painted if
Tintoretto were still around and, if he were not around, you settled
for Velasquez.  It was not the way either of them painted.  It was
simply a splendid portrait painted, as they sometimes are, in our time.

'It's wonderful,' the Colonel said.  'It is truly lovely.'

The concierge and the second waiter were holding it and looking at it
around the edges.  The _Gran Maestro_ was admiring fully.  The
American, two tables down, was looking at it with his journalistic
eyes, wondering who painted it.  The back of the canvas was to the
other diners.

'It is wonderful,' the Colonel said.  'But you can't give me that.'

'I already have,' the girl said.  'I'm sure my hair was never that long
over my shoulders.'

'I think it probably was.'

'I could try to let it get that long if you want.'

'Try,' the Colonel said.  'You great beauty you.  I love you very much.
You and you portrayed on canvas.'

'Tell the waiters if you like.  I'm sure it won't come as a great shock
to them.'

'Take the canvas upstairs to my room,' the Colonel said to the
concierge.  'Thank you very much for bringing it in.  If the price is
right, I am going to buy it.'

'The price is right,' the girl said to him.  'Should we have them take
it and the chairs down and make a special showing of it for your
compatriot?  The _Gran Maestro_ could tell him the address of the
painter and he could visit the picturesque studio.'

'It is a very lovely portrait,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'But it
should be taken to the room.  One should never let Roederer or
Perrier-Jouet do the talking.'

'Take it to the room, please.'

'You said please without a pause before it.'

'Thank you,' the Colonel said.  'I am very deeply moved by the portrait
and I am not entirely responsible for what I say.'

'Let's neither of us be responsible.'

'Agreed,' the Colonel said.  'The _Gran Maestro_ is really very
responsible.  He always was.'

'No,' the girl said.  'I think he did not only from responsibility but
from malice.  We all have malice, you know, of some kind or another in
this town.  I think perhaps he did not want the man to have even a
journalist's look into happiness.'

'Whatever that is.'

'I learned that phrase from you and now you have re-learned it back
from me.'

'That's the way it goes,' the Colonel said.  'What you win in Boston
you lose in Chicago.'

'I don't understand that at all.'

'Too hard to explain,' the Colonel said.  Then, 'No.  Of course it
isn't.  Making things clear is my main trade.  The hell with being too
hard to explain.  It is like professional football, _calcio_.  What you
win in Milano you lose in Torino.'

'I don't care about football.'

'Neither do I,' the Colonel said.  'Especially not about the Army and
Navy game and when the very high brass speaks in terms of American
football so they can understand, themselves, what they are talking of.'

'I think we will have a good time to-night.  Even under the
circumstances, whatever they are.'

'Should we take this new bottle in the gondola?'

'Yes,' the girl said.  'But with deep glasses.  I'll tell the _Gran
Maestro_.  Let's get our coats and go.'

'Good.  I'll take some of this medicine and sign for the G.M. and we'll
go.'

'I wish it was me taking the medicine instead of you.'

'I'm glad as hell it isn't,' the Colonel said.  'Should we pick our
gondola or have them bring one to the landing?'

'Let's gamble and have them bring one to the landing.  What do we have
to lose?'

'Nothing, I guess.  Probably nothing.'




Chapter XIII

They went out the side door of the hotel to the _imbarcadero_ and the
wind hit them.  The light from the hotel shone on the blackness of the
gondola and made the water green.  She looks as lovely as a good horse
or as a racing shell, the Colonel thought.  Why have I never seen a
gondola before?  What hand or eye framed that darked symmetry?

'Where should we go?' the girl asked.

Her hair, in the light from the hotel door and window, as she stood on
the dock by the black gondola, was blowing back in the wind, so she
looked like the figure-head on a ship.  The rest of it, too, the
Colonel thought.

'Let's just ride through the park,' the Colonel said.  'Or through the
Bois with the top down.  Let him take us out to Armenonville.'

'Will we go to Paris?'

'Sure,' the Colonel said.  'Tell him to take us for an hour where the
going is easiest.  I don't want to drive him into that wind.'

'The tide is quite high with this wind,' the girl said.  'Some of our
places he couldn't get under the bridges.  May I tell him where to go?'

'Of course, Daughter.'

'Stow that ice bucket aboard,' the Colonel said to the second waiter,
who had come out with them.

'The _Gran Maestro_ said to tell you, as you embarked, that this bottle
of wine was his present.'

'Thank him properly and tell him he can't do that.'

'He had better go into the wind a little first,' the girl said.  'Then
I know how he should go.'

'The _Gran Maestro_ sent this,' the second waiter said.

It was a folded, old U.S.O.D. blanket.  Renata was talking to the
gondoliere, her hair blowing.  The gondoliere wore a heavy blue navy
sweater and he was bare-headed too.

'Thank him,' the Colonel said.

He slipped a bill into the second waiter's hand.  The second waiter
returned it.  'You already made the notation on the check.  Neither you
nor I nor the _Gran Maestro_ are starving.'

'What about the moglie and the bambini?'

'I don't have that.  Your mediums smacked our house in Treviso.'

'I'm sorry.'

'You needn't be,' the second waiter said.  'You were a foot soldier as
I was.'

'Permit me to be sorry.'

'Sure,' the second waiter said.  'And what the hell difference does it
make?  Be happy, my Colonel and be happy, my Lady.'

They got down into the gondola and there was the same magic, as always,
of the light hull and the sudden displacement that you made and then
the trimming in the dark privacy and then the second trimming, as the
gondoliere started to scull, laying her partly on her side so that he
would have more control.

'Now,' the girl said.  'We are in our home and I love you.  Please kiss
me and put all love into it.'

The Colonel held her close, with her head thrown back and kissed her
until there was nothing left of the kiss but desperation.

'I love you.'

'Whatever that means,' she interrupted.

'I love you and I know whatever that means.  The picture is lovely.
But there is no word for what you are.'

'Wild,' she said.  'Or careless or unkempt?'

'No.'

'The last was one of the first words I learned from my governess.  It
means you do not comb your hair enough.  Neglectful is when you do not
brush one hundred strokes at night.'

'I'm going to run my hand through it and make it unkempter still.'

'Your hurt hand?'

'Yes.'

'We're sitting on the wrong sides for that.  Change over.'

'Good.  That is a sensible order couched in simple language and easily
understood.'

It was fun moving over, trying not to disturb the balance of the
gondola, but having to trim again carefully.

'Now,' she said.  'But hold me tightly with the other arm.'

'You know just what you want?'

'I do indeed.  Is it un-maidenly?  I learned that word, too, from my
governess.'

'No,' he said.  'It's lovely.  Pull up the blanket good and feel that
wind.'

'It's from the high mountains.'

'Yes.  And beyond there it's from somewhere else.'

The Colonel heard the slap of the waves and he felt the wind come
sharply and the rough familiarity of the blanket and then he felt the
girl cold-warm and lovely and with upraised breasts that his left hand
coasted lightly over.  Then he ran his bad hand through her hair once,
twice and three times and then he kissed her and it was worse than
desperation.

'Please,' she said, from almost underneath the blanket.  'Let me kiss
now.'

'No,' he said.  'Me again.'

The wind was very cold and lashed their faces but under the blanket
there was no wind nor nothing; only his ruined hand that searched for
the island in the great river with the high steep banks.

'That's it,' she said.

He kissed her then and he searched for the island, finding it and
losing it and then finding it for good.  For good and for bad, he
thought and for good and for all.

'My darling,' he said.  'My well beloved.  Please.'

'No.  Just hold me very tight and hold the high ground, too.'

The Colonel said nothing, because he was assisting, or had made an act
of presence, at the only mystery that he believed in except the
occasional bravery of man.

'Please don't move,' the girl said.  'Then move a great amount.'

The Colonel, lying under the blanket in the wind, knowing it is only
what man does for woman that he retains; except what he does for his
fatherland or his motherland, however you get the reading, proceeded.

'Please, darling,' the girl said.  'I don't think I can stand it.'

'Don't think of anything.  Don't think of anything at all.'

'I'm not.'

'Don't think.'

'Oh please let's not talk.'

'Is it right?'

'You know.'

'You're sure.'

'Oh please not talk.  Please.'

Yes, he thought.  Please and please again.

She said nothing and neither did he, and when the great bird had flown
far out of the closed window of the gondola and was lost and gone,
neither of them said anything.  He held her head lightly with his good
arm and the other arm held the high ground now.

'Please put it where it should be,' she said.  'Your hand.'

'Should we?'

'No.  Just hold me tight and try to love me true.'

'I love you true,' he said and just then the gondola turned to the
left, quite sharply and the wind was on his right cheek and he said,
with his old eyes catching the outline of the Palace where they turned
and noting it, 'You're in the lee now, Daughter.'

'But it is too soon now.  Don't you know how a woman feels?'

'No.  Only what you tell me.'

'Thank you for the you.  But don't you really know?'

'No.  I never asked, I guess.'

'Guess now,' she said.  'And please wait until after we have gone under
the second bridge.'

'Take a glass of this,' the Colonel said, reaching accurately and well
for the champagne bucket with the ice and uncorking the bottle the Gran
Maestro had uncorked and then placed a common wine cork in.

'This is good for you, Daughter.  It is good for all the ills that all
of us have and for all sadness and indecision.'

'I have none of those,' she said, speaking grammatically as her
governess had taught her.  'I am just a woman, or a girl, or whatever
that is, doing whatever it is she should not do.  Let's do it again,
please, now I am in the lee.'

'Where is the island now and in what river?'

'You are making the discovery.  I am only the unknown country.'

'Not too unknown,' the Colonel said.

'Please don't be rude,' the girl said.  'And please attack gently and
with the same attack as before.'

'It's no attack,' the Colonel said.  'It is something else.'

'Whatever it is, whatever it is, while I'm still in the lee.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'Yes, now if you want, or will accept from
kindness.'

'Please, yes.'

She talks like a gentle cat, though the poor cats cannot speak, the
Colonel thought.  But then he stopped thinking and he did not think for
a long time.

The gondola now was in one of the secondary canals.  When it had turned
from the Grand Canal, the wind had swung it so the gondoliere had to
shift all his weight as ballast and the Colonel and the girl had
shifted too, under the blanket, with the wind getting under the edge of
the blanket; wildly.

They had not spoken for a long time and the Colonel had noted that the
gondola had only inches free in passing under the last bridge.

'How are you, Daughter?'

'I'm quite lovely.'

'Do you love me?'

'Please don't ask such silly things.'

'The tide is very high and we only just made that last bridge.'

'I think I know where we are going.  I was born here.'

'I've made mistakes in my home town,' the Colonel said.  'Being born
there isn't everything.'

'It is very much,' the girl said.  'You know that.  Please hold me very
tightly so we can be a part of each other for a little while.'

'We can try,' the Colonel said.

'Couldn't I be you?'

'That's awfully complicated.  We could try of course.'

'I'm you now,' she said.  'And I just took the city of Paris.'

'Jesus, Daughter,' he said.  'You've got an awful lot of problems on
your hands.  The next thing, they will parade the twenty-eighth
division through.'

'I don't care.'

'I do.'

'Were they not good?'

'Sure.  They had fine commanders, too.  But they were National Guard
and hard luck.  What you call a T.S. division.  Get your T.S. slip from
the chaplain.'

'I understand none of those things.'

'They aren't worth explaining,' the Colonel said.

'Will you tell me some true things about Paris?  I love it so much and
when I think of you taking it, then, it is as though I were riding in
this gondola with Marechal Ney.'

'A no good job,' the Colonel said.  'Anyway, not after he fought all
those rear-guard actions coming back from that big Russian town.  He
used to fight ten, twelve, fifteen times a day.  Maybe more.
Afterwards, he couldn't recognize people.  Please don't get in any
gondolas with him.'

'He was always one of my great heroes.'

'Yeah.  Mine too.  Until Quatre Bras.  Maybe it wasn't Quatre Bras.
I'm getting rusty.  Give it the generic title of Waterloo.'

'Was he bad there?'

'Awful,' the Colonel told her.  'Forget it.  Too many rear-guard
actions coming back from Moskova.'

'But they called him the bravest of the brave.'

'You can't eat on that.  You have to be that, always, and then be the
smartest of the smart.  Then you need a lot of stuff coming up.'

'Tell me about Paris, please.  We should not make more love, I know.'

'I don't know it.  Who says it?'

'I say it because I love you.'

'All right.  You said it and you love me.  So we act on that.  The hell
with it.'

'Do you think we could once more if it would not hurt you?'

'Hurt me?' the Colonel said.  'When the hell was I ever hurt?'




Chapter XIV

'Please don't be bad,' she said, pulling the blanket over them both.
'Please drink a glass of this with me.  You know you've been hurt.'

'Exactly,' the Colonel said.  'Let's forget it.'

'All right,' she said.  'I learned that word, or those two words from
you.  We have forgotten it.'

'Why do you like the hand?' the Colonel asked, placing it where he
should.

'Please don't pretend to be stupid and please let's not think of
anything, or anything, or anything.'

'I am stupid,' the Colonel said.  'But I won't think of anything or
anything nor of nothing nor of his brother, to-morrow.'

'Please be good and kind.'

'I will be.  And I will tell you, now, a military secret.  Top Secret
equals British Most Secret.  I love you.'

'That's nice,' she said.  'And you put it nicely.'

'I'm nice,' the Colonel said and checked on the bridge that was coming
up and saw there was clearance.  'That's the first thing people notice
about me.'

'I always use the wrong words,' the girl said.  'Please just love me.
I wish it was me who could love you.'

'You do.'

'Yes, I do,' she said.  'With all my heart.'

They were going with the wind now and they were both tired.

'Do you think----'

'I don't think,' the girl said.

'Well try and think.'

'I will.'

'Drink a glass of this.'

'Why not?  It's very good.'

It was.  There was still ice in the bucket and the wine was cold and
clear.

'Can I stay at the Gritti?'

'No.'

'Why not?'

'It wouldn't be right.  For them.  Nor you.  The hell with me.'

'Then I suppose I should go home.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'That is the logical supposition.'

'That is an awful way to say a sad thing.  Can't we even pretend some
things?'

'No.  I'll take you home and you sleep good and well and to-morrow we
will meet where and when you say.'

'May I call the Gritti?'

'Of course.  I'll always be awake.  Will you call when you are awake?'

'Yes.  But why do you always wake so early?'

'It is a business habit.'

'Oh, I wish you were not in that business and that you were not going
to die.'

'So do I,' said the Colonel.  'But I'm getting out of the business.'

'Yes,' she said, sleepily and comfortably.  'Then we go to Rome and get
the clothes.'

'And live happily ever after.'

'Please don't,' she said.  'Please, please, don't.  You know I made the
resolution not to cry.'

'You're crying now,' the Colonel said.  'What the hell have you got to
lose on that resolution?'

'Take me home, please.'

'That's what I was doing in the first place,' the Colonel told her.

'Be kind once first.'

'I will,' the Colonel said.

After they, or the Colonel, rather, had paid the gondoliere who was
unknowing, yet knowing all; solid, sound, respectful and trustworthy;
they walked into the Piazzetta and then across the great, cold,
wind-swept square that was hard and old under their feet.  They walked
holding close and hard in their sorrow and their happiness.

'This is the place where the German shot the pigeons,' the girl said.

'We probably killed him,' the Colonel said.  'Or his brother.  Maybe we
hanged him.  I wouldn't know.  I'm not in C.I.D.'

'Do you love me still on these water-worn, cold and old stones?'

'Yes.  I'd like to spread a bed roll here and prove it.'

'That would be more barbarous than the pigeon shooter.'

'I'm barbarous,' the Colonel said.

'Not always.'

'Thank you for the not always.'

'We turn here.'

'I think I know that.  When are they going to tear that damned Cinema
Palace down and put up a real cathedral?  That's what T5 Jackson wants.'

'When someone brings Saint Mark back another time under a load of pork
from Alexandria.'

'That was a Torcello boy.'

'You're a Torcello boy.'

'Yes.  I'm a Basso Piave boy and a Grappa boy straight here from
Pertica.  I'm a Pasubio boy, too, if you know what that means.  It was
worse just to live there than to fight anywhere else.  In the platoon
they used to share anyone's gonococci brought from Schio and carried in
a match-box.  They used to share this just so they could leave because
it was intolerable.'

'But you stayed.'

'Sure,' the Colonel said.  'I'm always the last man to leave the party,
fiesta I mean, not as in political party.  The truly unpopular guest.'

'Should we go?'

'I thought you had made up your mind.'

'I had.  But when you said it about unpopular guest it was unmade.'

'Keep it made up.'

'I can hold a decision.'

'I know.  You can hold any damn thing.  But, Daughter, sometimes you
don't just hold.  That is for stupids.  Sometimes you have to switch
fast.'

'I'll switch if you like.'

'No.  I think the decision was sound.'

'But won't it be an awfully long time until morning?'

'That all depends on whether one has luck or not.'

'I should sleep well.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'At your age if you can't sleep they ought to
take you out and hang you.'

'Oh please.'

'Sorry,' he said.  'I meant shoot you.'

'We are nearly home and you could be kind now if you wanted.'

'I'm so kind I stink.  Let somebody else be kind.'

They were in front of the palace now and there it was; the palace.
There was nothing to do now but pull the bell cord, or enter with the
key.  I've been lost in this place, the Colonel thought, and I was
never lost in my life.

'Please kiss me good night, kindly.'

The Colonel did and loved her so he could not bear it.

She opened the door with the key, which was in her bag.  Then she was
gone and the Colonel was alone, with the worn pavement, the wind, which
still held in the north and the shadows from where a light went on.  He
walked home.

Only tourists and lovers take gondolas, he thought.  Except to cross
the canal in the places where there are no bridges.  I ought to go to
Harry's, probably, or some damn place.  But I think I'll go home.




Chapter XV

It was really home, if a hotel room can be so described.  His pyjamas
were laid on the bed.  There was a bottle of Valpolicella by the
reading light and by the bed a bottle of mineral water, in an ice
bucket with a glass beside it on the silver tray.  The portrait had
been deframed and was placed on two chairs where he could see it from
the bed.

The Paris edition of the _New York Herald Tribune_ lay on the bed
beside his three pillows.  He used three pillows, as Amaldo knew, and
his extra bottle of medicine, not the one that he carried in his
pocket, was beside the reading light.  The inner doors of the armoire,
the mirrored ones, were opened in such a way that he could see the
portrait from the side.  His scuffed slippers were by the bed.

I'll buy it, the Colonel said, to himself, since there was no one else
there except the portrait.

He opened the Valpolicella which had been uncorked, and then re-corked,
carefully, precisely and lovingly and poured himself a glass into the
glass which was much better than any hotel should use which was faced
with breakage.

'Here's to you, Daughter,' he said.  'You beauty and lovely.  Do you
know, that, among other things, you smell good always?  You smell
wonderfully even in a high wind or under a blanket or kissing good
night.  You know almost no one does and you don't use scent.'

She looked at him from the portrait and said nothing.

'The hell with it,' he said.  'I'm not going to talk to a picture.'

What do you think went wrong to-night? he thought.

Me, I guess.  Well I will try to be a good boy to-morrow all day;
starting at first light.

'Daughter,' he said, and he was talking to her and not to a picture
now.  'Please know I love you and that I wish to be delicate and good.
And please stay with me always now.'

The picture was the same.

The Colonel took out the emeralds from his pocket and looked at them,
feeling them slide, cold and yet warm, as they take warmth and as all
good stones have warmth, from his bad hand into his good hand.

I should have put these in an envelope and locked them up, he thought.
But what the ---- security is there better than I can give them?  I
have to get these back to you fast, Daughter.

It was fun, though.  And they're not worth more than a quarter of a
million.  What I would make in four hundred years.  Have to check that
figure.

He put the stones in the pocket of his pyjamas and put a handkerchief
over them.  Then he buttoned the pocket.  The first sound thing you
learn, he thought, is to have flaps and buttons on all your pockets.  I
imagine that I learned it too early.

The stones felt good.  They were hard and warm against his flat, hard,
old and warm chest, and he noted how the wind was blowing, looked at
the portrait, poured another glass of Valpolicella and then started to
read the Paris edition of the _New York Herald Tribune_.

I ought to take the pills, he thought.  But the hell with the pills.

Then he took them just the same and went on reading the _New York
Herald_.  He was reading Red Smith and he liked him very much.




Chapter XVI

The colonel woke before daylight and checked that there was no one
sleeping with him.

The wind was still blowing hard and he went to the open windows to
check the weather.  There was no light as yet in the east across the
Grand Canal, but his eyes could see how rough the water was.  Be a hell
of a tide to-day, he thought.  Probably flood the square.  That's
always fun.  Except for the pigeons.

He went to the bathroom, taking the _Herald Tribune_ and Red Smith with
him, as well as a glass of Valpolicella.  Damn I'll be glad when the
_Gran Maestro_ gets those big fiascos, he thought.  This wine gets
awfully dreggy at the end.

He sat there, with his newspaper, thinking of the things of that day.

There would be the telephone call.  But it might be very late because
she would be sleeping late.  The young sleep late, he thought, and the
beautiful sleep half again as late.  She certainly would not call early
and the shops did not open until nine or a little later.

Hell, he thought, I have these damned stones.  How could anyone do a
thing like that?

You know how, he said to himself, reading the ads. in the back of the
paper.  You've put it on the line enough times.  It isn't crazy or
morbid.  She just wanted to put it on the line.  It was a good thing it
was me, he thought.

That is the only good thing about being me, he considered.  Well I'm
me, God-damn it.  For better or for much worse.  How would you like to
sit on the can as you have sat almost every morning of your damned life
with this in your pocket?

He was addressing no one, except, perhaps, posterity.

How many mornings have you sat in the row with all the others?  That's
the worst of it.  That and shaving.  Or you go off to be alone and
think or not think and pick a good piece of cover and there are two
riflemen there already, or some boy asleep.

There's no more privacy in the army than in a professional ----.  I've
never been in a professional ---- but I imagine they run it much the
same.  I could learn to run one, he thought.

Then I'd make all my leading ---- characters Ambassadors and the
unsuccessful ones could be Corps commanders or command military
districts in peace time.  Don't be bitter, boy, he said to himself.
It's too early in the morning and your duty's not completed yet.

What would you do with their wives, he asked himself?  Buy them new
hats or shoot them, he said.  It's all part of the same process.

He looked at himself in the mirror, set in the half-closed door.  It
showed him at a slight angle.  It's a deflexion shot, he said to
himself and they didn't lead me enough.  Boy, he said, you certainly
are a beat-up, old looking bastard.

Now you have to shave and look at that face while you do it.  Then you
must get a hair-cut.  That's easy in this town.  You're a Colonel of
Infantry, boy.  You can't go around looking like Joan of Arc or General
(Breveted) George Armstrong Custer.  That beautiful horse-cavalryman.
I guess it is fun to be that way and have a loving wife and use sawdust
for brains.  But it must have seemed like the wrong career to him when
they finished up on that hill above the Little Big Horn, with the
ponies making the circle around them in all the dust and the sage brush
crushed by the hooves of the horses of the other people and nothing
left to him for the rest of his life but that old lovely black powder
smell and his own people shooting each other and themselves, because
they were afraid of what the squaws would do to them.

The body was unspeakably mutilated, they used to put in this same
paper.  And on that hill to know you'd made one real mistake, finally
and for good and complete with true handles.  Poor horse-cavalryman, he
thought.  The end of all his dreams.  That's one good thing about being
an Infantryman.  You never have any dreams except bad dreams.

Well, he said to himself, we're finished here and pretty soon there
will be good light and I can see the portrait.  I'll be damned if I'll
turn that in.  I keep that.

Oh Christ, he said, I wonder what she looks like now sleeping.  I know
how she looks, he said to himself.  Wonderful.  She sleeps as though
she had not gone to sleep.  As though she were just resting.  I hope
she is, he thought.  I hope she's resting well.  Christ Jesus how I
love her and I hope I never do her harm.




Chapter XVII

When it started to be light, the Colonel saw the portrait.  He, very
probably, saw it as quickly as any man who was civilized and had to
read and sign the forms he did not believe in, could see an object, as
soon as it was visible.  Yes, he said to himself, I have eyes and they
have fairly fast perception still and once they had ambition.  I have
led my Ruffians where they were well peppered.  There are but three of
the two hundred and fifty of them left alive and they are for the
town's end to beg during life.

That's from Shakespeare, he told the portrait.  The winner and still
the undisputed champion.

Someone might take him, in a short bout.  But I would rather revere
him.  Did you ever read _King Lear_, Daughter?  Mr. Gene Tunney did and
he was the champion of the world.  But I read it too.  Soldiers care
for Mr. Shakespeare too, though it may seem impossible.

You have anything to say in your defence except to put your head back?
he asked the portrait.  You want some more, Shakespeare?

You don't have to defend.  You just rest and leave it as it is.  It's
no good.  Your defence and my defence is no damn good.  But who could
tell you to go out and hang yourself the way we do?

Nobody, he said to himself and to the portrait.  And certainly not me.

He put his good hand down and found that the room waiter had left a
second bottle of Valpolicella alongside of where the first had been.

If you love a country, the Colonel thought, you might as well admit it.
Sure, admit it, boy.

I have loved three and lost them thrice.  Give a credit.  We've re-took
two.  Retaken, he corrected.

And we will retake the other one, General Fat Ass Franco on his
shooting stick with the advice of his doctor and tame ducks and a
screen of Moorish cavalry when he shoots.

Yes, he said softly to the girl who looked at him clearly now in the
first and best light.

We will retake and they will all be hung upside down outside of filling
stations.  You have been warned, he added.

'Portrait,' he said, 'why the hell can't you just get into bed with me
instead of being eighteen solid stone blocks away.  Maybe more.  I'm
not as sharp now as I was; whenever.'

'Portrait,' he said to the girl and to the portrait and to the girl
both; but there wasn't any girl and the portrait was as it was painted.

'Portrait, keep your God-damn chin up so you can break my heart easier.'

It certainly was a lovely present, the Colonel thought.

'Can you manoeuvre?' he asked the portrait.  'Good and fast?'

Portrait said nothing and the Colonel answered.  You know damn well she
can.  She'd out-manoeuvre you the best day you were ever born and she
would stay and fight where you would ----, discreetly.

'Portrait,' he said.  'Boy or daughter or my one true love or whatever
it is; you know what it is, portrait.'

The Portrait, as before, did not answer.  But the Colonel, who was a
General now again, early in the morning at the only time he really
knew, and with Valpolicella, knew as absolutely as though he had just
read his third Wassermann that there was no ---- in Portrait and he
felt shame for having talked to Portrait roughly.

'I'll be the best God-damned boy you ever witnessed to-day.  And you
can tell your principal that.'

Portrait, as was her fashion, was silent.

She probably would speak to a horse-cavalryman, the General, for now he
had two stars and they grated on his shoulders and showed white in the
vague, scuffed red on the plaque in front of his jeep.  He never used
command cars, nor semi-armoured vehicles complete with sand-bags.

'The hell with you, Portrait,' he said.  'Or get your T.S. slip from
the universal chaplain of us all, with combined religions.  You ought
to be able to eat on that.'

'The hell with you,' the Portrait said, without speaking.  'You low
class soldier.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said, for now he was a Colonel again and had
relinquished all his former rank.

'I love you, Portrait, very much.  But don't get rough with me.  I love
you very much because you are beautiful.  But I love the girl better, a
million times better, hear it?'

There was no sign that she heard it, so he tired of it.

'You are in a fixed position, Portrait,' he said.  'Without or with any
frame.  And I am going to manoeuvre.'

The portrait was as silent as she had been since the concierge had
brought her into the room, and aided and abetted by the second waiter,
had shown her to the Colonel and to the girl.

The Colonel looked at her and saw she was indefensible, now that the
light was good, or almost good.

He saw, too, that she was the portrait of his own true love and so he
said, 'I am sorry for all the stupidnesses I say.  I do not wish ever
to be brutal.  Maybe we could both sleep a little while, with luck, and
then, perhaps, your Mistress would call on the telephone?'

Maybe she will even call, he thought.




Chapter XVIII

The hall porter pushed the _Gazzettina_ under the door and the Colonel
had it, noiselessly, almost as soon as it had passed through the slit.

He very nearly took it from the hall porter's hand.  He did not like
the hall porter since he had found him, one day, going through his bag,
when he, the Colonel, had re-entered the room after having left it,
presumably for some time.  He had to come back to the room to get his
bottle of medicine, which he had forgotten, and the hall porter was
well through his bag.

'I guess you don't say stick them up in this hotel,' the Colonel had
said.  'But you're no credit to your town.'

There was silence produced and re-produced, by the striped waistcoated
man with the Fascist face and the Colonel said, 'Go on, boy, look
through the rest of it.  I don't carry any military secrets with my
toilet articles.'

Since then, there was scant friendship between them and the Colonel
enjoyed trying to take the morning paper from the striped waistcoated
man's hand; noiselessly, and when he heard, or saw it first make a move
under the door.

'O.K., you won to-day, jerk,' he said in the best Venetian dialect he
could summon at that hour.  'Go hang yourself.'

But they don't hang themselves, he thought.  They just have to go on
putting papers under other people's doors that do not even hate them.
It must be quite a difficult trade being an ex-Fascist.  Maybe he is
not an ex-Fascist, too.  How do you know.

I can't hate Fascists, he thought.  Nor Krauts, either, since
unfortunately, I am a soldier.

'Listen, Portrait,' he said.  'Do I have to hate the Krauts because we
kill them?  Do I have to hate them as soldiers and as human beings?  It
seems too easy a solution to me.'

Well, Portrait.  Forget it.  Forget it.  You're not old enough to know
about it.  You are two years younger than the girl that you portray and
she is younger and older than hell; which is quite an old place.

'Listen, Portrait,' he said and, saying it, knew that now, as long as
he lived, he would have someone to talk to at the early hours that he
woke.

'As I was saying, Portrait.  The hell with that too.  That's too old
for you too.  That is one of the things you can't say no matter how
true it is.  There are lots of things I can never say to you and maybe
that will be good for me.  It is about time something was.  What do you
think would be good for me, Portrait?'

'What's the matter, Portrait?' he asked her.  'You getting hungry?  I
am.'

So he rang the bell for the waiter who would bring breakfast.

He knew that now, even though the light was so good that every wave
showed on the Grand Canal, lead-coloured and solid heavy with the wind
and the tide now high over the landing steps of the Palace directly
opposite his room, that there would be no telephone call for several
hours.

The young sleep good, he thought.  They deserve it.

'Why do we have to get old?' he asked the waiter who had come in with
his glass-eye and the menu.

'I don't know, my Colonel.  I suppose it is a natural process.'

'Yes.  I guess I imagine that too.  The eggs fried with their faces up.
Tea and toast.'

'You don't want anything American?'

'The hell with anything American except me.  Is the _Gran Maestro_
astir yet?'

'He has your Valpolicella in the big wicker fiascos of two litres and I
have brought this decanter with it.'

'That one,' the Colonel said.  'I wish to Christ I could give him a
regiment.'

'I don't think he would want one, really.'

'No,' the Colonel said.  'I don't want one, really, myself.'




Chapter XIX

The colonel breakfasted with the leisure of a fighter who has been
clipped badly, hears four and knows how to relax truly for five seconds
more.

'Portrait,' he said.  'You ought to relax too.  That's the only thing
that is going to be difficult about you.  That's what they call the
static element in painting.  You know, Portrait that almost no
pictures, paintings rather, move at all.  A few do, but not many.

'I wish that your mistress was here and we could have movement.  How do
girls like you and she know so much so damn young and be so beautiful?

'With us, if a girl is really beautiful, she comes from Texas and
maybe, with luck, she can tell you what month it is.  They can all
count good though.

'They teach them how to count and keep their legs together and how to
put their hair up in pin curls.  Sometime, Portrait, for your sins, if
you have any, you ought to have to sleep in a bed with a girl who has
put her hair up in pin curls to be beautiful to-morrow.  Not to-night.
They'd never be beautiful to-night.  For to-morrow, when we make the
competition.

'The girl, Renata, that you are, is sleeping now without ever having
done anything to her hair.  She is sleeping with it spread out on the
pillow and all it is to her is a glorious, dark, silky annoyance, that
she can hardly remember to comb, except that her governess taught her.

'I see her in the street with the lovely long-legged stride and the
wind doing anything it wants to her hair and her true breasts under the
sweater and then I see the nights in Texas with the pin curls; tight
and subjected by metallic instruments.

'Pin me no pin curls, my beloved,' he said to the portrait, 'and I will
try to lay it on the line in round, heavy, hard silver dollars or with
the other.'

I mustn't get rough, he thought.

Then he said to the portrait, for he did not capitalize her now in his
mind, 'You are so God-damned beautiful you stink.  Also you are
jail-bait.  Renata's two years older now.  You are under seventeen.'

And why can't I have her and love her and cherish her and never be
rude, nor bad and have the five sons that go to the five corners of the
world; wherever that is!  I don't know.  I guess the cards we draw are
those we get.  You wouldn't like to re-deal would you, dealer?

No.  They only deal to you once and then you pick them up and play
them.  I can play them, if I draw any damn thing at all, he told
portrait; who was also unimpressed.

'Portrait,' he said.  'You better look the other way so that you will
not be un-maidenly.  I am going to take a shower now and shave,
something you will never have to do, and put on my soldier-suit and go
and walk around this town even though it is too early.'

So, he got out of bed, favouring his bad leg, which hurt him always.
He pulled the reading light with his bad hand.  There was sufficient
light and he had been wasting electricity for nearly an hour.

He regretted this as he regretted all his errors.  He walked past
portrait, only looking casually and looked at himself in the mirror.
He had dropped both parts of his pyjamas and he looked at himself
critically and truly.

'You beat-up old bastard,' he said to the mirror.  Portrait was a thing
of the past.  Mirror was actuality and of this day.

The gut is flat, he said without uttering it.  The chest is all right
except where it contains the defective muscle.  We are hung as we are
hung, for better or worse, or something, or something awful.

You are one half a hundred years old, you bastard you.  Now go in and
take a shower and scrub good and afterwards put on your soldier-suit.
To-day is another day.




Chapter XX

The colonel stopped at the reception desk in the lobby, but the
concierge was not there yet.  There was only the night porter.

'Can you put something in the safe for me?'

'No, my Colonel.  No one may open the safe until the assistant manager,
or the concierge, arrives.  But I will guard anything for you that you
wish.'

'Thank you.  It's not worth the trouble,' and he buttoned the Gritti
envelope, with the stones inside, the envelope addressed to himself,
into the inside left pocket of his tunic.

'There's no real crime here now,' the night porter said.

It had been a long night and he was happy to speak to someone.  'There
never really was, my Colonel.  There are only differences of opinion
and politics.'

'What do you have for politics?' the Colonel asked; for he was lonely,
too.

'About what you would expect.'

'I see.  And how is your thing going?'

'I think it goes quite well.  Maybe not as well as last year.  But
still quite well.  We were beaten and we have to wait a while now.'

'Do you work at it?'

'Not much.  It is more the politics of my heart than of my head.  I
believe in it with my head too, but I have very little political
development.'

'When you get it you won't have any heart.'

'Maybe not.  Do you have politics in the army?'

'Plenty,' the Colonel said.  'But not what you mean.'

'Well, we better not discuss it then.  I have not meant to be
intrusive.'

'I asked the question; the original question rather.  It was only to
talk.  It was not an interrogation.'

'I don't think it was.  You do not have the face of an inquisitor, my
Colonel, and I know about the Order, although I am not a member.'

'You may be member material.  I'll take it up with the _Gran Maestro_.'

'We come from the same town; but from distinct quarters.'

'It's a good town.'

'My Colonel, I have so little political development that I believe all
honourable men are honourable.'

'Oh you'll get over that,' the Colonel assured him.  'Don't worry, boy.
You've got a young party.  Naturally you make errors.'

'Please don't talk like that.'

'It was just rough early morning joking.'

'Tell me, my Colonel, what do you really think about Tito?'

'I think several things.  But he's my next-door neighbour.  I've found
it better not to talk about my neighbour.'

'I'd like to learn.'

'Then learn it the hard way.  Don't you know people don't give answers
to such questions?'

'I had hoped they did.'

'They don't,' the Colonel said.  'Not in my position.  All I can tell
you is that Mr. Tito has plenty problems.'

'Well, I know that now truly,' the night porter who was really only a
boy said.

'I hope you do,' the Colonel said.  'I wouldn't call it, as knowledge,
any pearl of great price.  Now, good day, for I must take a walk for
the good of my liver, or something.'

'Good day, my Colonel.  _Fa brutto tempo_.'

'_Bruttissimo_,' the Colonel said and, pulling the belt of his raincoat
tight and settling his shoulders into it and the skirts well down, he
stepped out into the wind.

Chapter XXI

The colonel took the ten _centesimi_ gondola across the Canal, paying
the usual dirty note and standing with the crowd of those condemned to
early rising.

He looked back at the Gritti and saw the windows of his room; still
open.  There was no promise, nor threat of rain; only the same strong,
wild, cold wind from the mountains.  Everyone in the gondola looked
cold and the Colonel thought, I wish I could issue these wind-proof
coats to everyone on board.  God, and every officer that ever wore one,
knows they are not water-proof and who made the money out of that one?

You can't get water through a Burberry.  But I suppose some able jerk
has his boy in Groton now, or maybe Canterbury, where the big
contractors' boys go, because our coats leaked.

And what about some brother officer of mine who split with him?  I
wonder who the Benny Meyers of the ground forces were?  There probably
wasn't only one.  Probably, he thought, there must be very many.  You
must not be awake yet, to talk that simply.  They do keep the wind out
though.  The raincoats.  Raincoats my ass.

The gondola pulled up between the stakes on the far bank of the canal
and the Colonel watched the black-clad people climb up out of the
black-painted vehicle.  Is she a vehicle?  he thought.  Or must a
vehicle have wheels or be tracked?

Nobody would give you a penny for your thoughts, he thought.  Not this
morning.  But I've seen them worth a certain amount of money when the
chips were down.

He penetrated into the far side of the city, the side that finally
fronted on the Adriatic and that he liked the best.  He was going in by
a very narrow street and he was going to not keep track of the number
of more or less north and south streets that he crossed, nor count the
bridges and then try and orient himself so he would come out at the
market without getting up any dead ends.

It was a game you play, as some people used to play double Canfield or
any solitary card games.  But it had the advantage of you moving while
you do it and that you look at the houses, the minor vistas, the shops
and the _trattorias_ and at old palaces of the city of Venice while you
are walking.  If you loved the city of Venice it was an excellent game.

It is a sort of _solitaire ambulante_ and what you win is the happiness
of your eye and heart.  If you made the market, on this side of town,
without ever being stymied, you won the game.  But you must not make it
too easy and you must not count.

On the other side of the town, game was to leave from the Gritti and
make the Rialto by the _Fondamente Nuove_ without a mistake.

Then you could climb the bridge and cross it and go down into the
market.  He liked the market best.  It was the part of any town he
always went to first.

Just then he heard the two young men behind him saying the things about
him.  He knew they were young men by their voices and he did not look
back, but listened carefully for distance and waited for the next turn
to see them, as he turned.

They are on their way to work, he decided.  Maybe they are former
Fascists or maybe they are something else, or maybe it is just the line
that they are talking.  But they are making it pretty personal now.  It
isn't just Americans, it is also me, myself, my grey hair, the slightly
crooked way I walk, the combat boots (those, of that stripe, disliked
the practicability of combat boots.  They liked boots that rang on the
flag stones and took a high black polish).

It is my uniform which they find to be without grace.  Now it is why I
am walking at this hour and now it is their absolute security that I
can no longer make love.

The Colonel swung sharp to the left at the next corner, seeing what he
had to deal with and the exact distance and when the two young men came
around the corner which was formed by the apse of the church of Frari
there was no Colonel.  He was in the dead angle behind the apse of the
ancient church and as they passed, he, hearing them come by their talk,
stepped out with a hand in each low pocket of his raincoat and turned
himself and the raincoat, with the two hands in the pockets, towards
them.

They stopped and he looked at them both in the face and smiled his old
and worn death smile.  Then he looked down at their feet, as you always
look at the feet of such people, since they wear their shoes too tight
and when you take the shoes off them you see their hammer-toes.  The
Colonel spat on the pavement and said nothing.

The two of them, they _were_ the first thing he had suspected, looked
at him with hatred and with that other thing.  Then they were off like
marsh-birds, walking with the long strides of herons too, the Colonel
thought, and something of the flight of curlews and looking back with
hatred, waiting to have the last word if the distance was ever safe.

It is a pity they weren't ten against one, the Colonel thought.  They
might have fought.  I should not blame them, since they were defeated.

But their manners were not good in respect to a man of my rank and age.
Also it was not intelligent to think all fifty-year-old colonels would
not understand their language.  Nor was it intelligent to think old
Infantrymen would not fight this early in the morning against the
simple odds of two to one.

I'd hate to fight in this town where I love the people.  I would avoid
it.  But couldn't those badly educated youths realize what sort of
animal they were dealing with?  Don't they know how you get to walk
that way?  Nor any of the other signs that combat people show as surely
as a fisherman's hands tell you if he is a fisherman from the creases
from the cord cuts.

It is true they only saw my back and ass and legs and boots.  But you'd
think they might have told from the way they must move.  Maybe they
don't any more.  But when I had a chance to look at them and think.
Take the two of them out and hang them, I believe they understood.
They understood quite clearly.

What's a man's life worth anyway?  Ten thousand dollars if his
insurance is paid up in our army.  What the hell has that got to do
with it.  Oh yes, that was what I was thinking about before those jerks
showed; how much money I had saved my government, in my time when
people like Benny Meyers were in the trough.

Yes, he said and how much you lost them at the Chateau that time at ten
Gs a head.  Well nobody ever really understood it except me, I guess.
There's no reason to tell them now.  Your commanding general sometimes
puts things down as the Fortunes of War.  Back at Army they know such
things are bound to happen.  You do it, as ordered, with a big butcher
bill and you're a hero.

Christ, I am opposed to the excessive butcher bill, he thought.  But
you get the orders, and you have to carry them out.  It is the mistakes
that are no good to sleep with.  But why the hell sleep with them
anyway.  It never did any good.  But they can certainly crawl into a
sack sometimes.  They can crawl in and stay in there with you.

Cheer up, boy, he said.  Remember you had a lot of money on you when
you picked that one.  And you might have been stripped if you lost.
You can't fight a lick any more with your hands and you didn't have any
weapon.

So don't be gloomy, boy, or man, or Colonel, or busted General.  We're
almost to the market now and you made it without hardly noticing.

Hardly noticing is bad, he added.




Chapter XXII

He loved the market.  A great part of it was close-packed and crowded
into several side streets and it was so concentrated that it was
difficult not to jostle people, unintentionally, and each time you
stopped to look, to buy, or to admire, you formed an _îlot de
résistance_ against the flow of the morning attack of the purchasers.

The Colonel liked to study the spread and high piled cheeses and the
great sausages.  People at home think _mortadella_ is a sausage, he
thought.

Then he said to the woman in the booth, 'Let me try a little of that
sausage, please.  Only a sliver.'

She cut a thin, paper thin, slice for him, ferociously and lovingly,
and when the Colonel tasted it there was the half smoky, black
pepper-corned, true flavour of the meat from the hogs that ate acorns
in the mountains.

'I will take a quarter of a kilo.'

The Barone's lunches for the shooting blinds were of a Spartan quality,
which the Colonel respected, since he knew no one should eat much while
shooting.  He felt, though, that he might augment the lunch with his
sausage and share it with the poler and picker-upper.  He might give a
slice to Bobby, the retriever, who would be wet through to his hide
many times and enthusiastic still, but shaking with cold.

'Is this the best sausage that you have?' he asked the woman.  'Have
you nothing that does not show and is reserved for better and steadier
customers?'

'This is the best sausage.  There are many other sausages, as you know.
But this is the best.'

'Then give me one-eighth of a kilo of a sausage that is highly
fortifying, but is not highly seasoned.'

'I have it,' she said.  'It is a little new but exactly as you
describe.'

This sausage was for Bobby.

But you do not say that you buy sausages for a dog in Italy where the
worst crime is to be considered a fool and many people go hungry.  You
may give expensive sausage to a dog before a man who works for his
living and knows what a dog goes through in water in cold weather.  But
you do not buy them, stating your purpose in possessing them, unless
you are a fool, or a millionaire from the war and from after.

The Colonel paid for the wrapped-up package and proceeded on through
the market inhaling the smell of roasted coffee and looking at the
amount of fat on each carcass in the butcher section, as though he were
enjoying the Dutch painters, whose names no one remembers, who painted,
in perfection of detail, all things you shot, or that were eatable.

A market is the closest thing to a good museum like the Prado or as the
Accademia is now, the Colonel thought.

He took a short cut and was at the fish market.

In the market, spread on the slippery stone floor, or in their baskets,
or their rope-handled boxes, were the heavy, grey-green lobsters with
their magenta overtones that presaged their death in boiling water.
They have all been captured by treachery, the Colonel thought, and
their claws are pegged.

There were the small soles and there were a few albacore and bonito.
These last, the Colonel thought, looked like boat-tailed bullets,
dignified in death and with the huge eye of the pelagic fish.

They were not made to be caught except for their voraciousness.  The
poor sole exists, in shallow water, to feed man.  But these other
roving bullets, in their great bands, live in blue water and travel
through all oceans and all seas.

A nickel for your thoughts now, he thought.  Let's see what else they
have.

There were many eels, alive and no longer confident in their eeldom.
There were fine prawns that could make a scampi brochetto spitted and
broiled on a rapier-like instrument that could be used as a Brooklyn
ice-pick.  There were medium-sized shrimps, grey and opalescent,
awaiting their turn, too, for the boiling water and their immortality,
to have their shucked carcasses float out easily on an ebb tide on the
Grand Canal.

The speedy shrimp, the Colonel thought, with tentacles longer than the
moustaches of that old Japanese admiral, comes here now to die for our
benefit.  Oh Christian shrimp, he thought, master of retreat, and with
your wonderful intelligence service in those two light whips, why did
they not teach you about nets and that lights are dangerous?

Must have been some slip-up, he thought.

Now he looked at the many small crustaceans, the razor-edge clams you
only should eat raw if you had your typhoid shots up to date, and all
the small delectables.

He went past these, stopping to ask one seller where his clams came
from.  They came from a good place, without sewerage, and the Colonel
asked to have six opened.  He drank the juice and cut the clam out,
cutting close against the shell with the curved knife the man handed
him.  The man had handed him the knife because he knew from experience
the Colonel cut closer to the shell than he had been taught to cut.

The Colonel paid him the pittance that they cost, which must have been
much greater than the pittance those received who caught them, and he
thought, now I must see the stream and canal fishes and get back to the
hotel.




Chapter XXIII

The colonel arrived at the lobby of the Hotel Gritti-Palace.  His
gondolieres were paid off and, now, inside the hotel, there was no wind.

It had taken two men to bring the gondola up the Grand Canal from the
market.  They had both worked hard, and he had paid them what it was
worth, and some more.

'Are there any calls for me?' he asked the concierge, who was now in
attendance.

The concierge was light, fast, sharp-faced, intelligent and polite,
always, without subservience.  He wore the crossed keys of his office
on the lapels of his blue uniform without ostentation.  He was the
concierge.  It is a rank very close to that of Captain, the Colonel
thought.  An officer and not a Gentleman.  Make it top sergeant in the
old days; except he's dealing always with the brass.

'My lady has called twice,' the concierge said in English.  Or whatever
that language should be called we all speak, the Colonel thought.
Leave it at English.  That is about what they have left.  They should
be allowed to keep the name of the language.  Cripps will probably
ration it shortly, anyway.

'Please put me through to her at once,' he told the concierge.

The concierge commenced to dial numbers.

'You may talk over there, my Colonel,' he said.  'I have made the
connection.'

'You're fast.'

'Over there,' the concierge said.

Inside the booth the Colonel lifted the receiver and said,
automatically, 'Colonel Cantwell speaking.'

'I called twice, Richard,' the girl said.  'But they explained that you
were out.  Where were you?'

'At the market.  How are you, my lovely?'

'No one listens on this phone at this hour.  I am your lovely.  Whoever
that is.'

'You.  Did you sleep well?'

'It was like ski-ing in the dark.  Not really ski-ing but really dark.'

'That's the way it should be.  Why did you wake so early?  You've
frightened my concierge.'

'If it is not un-maidenly, how soon can we meet, and where?'

'Where you wish and when you wish.'

'Do you still have the stones and did Miss Portrait help any?'

'Yes to both questions.  The stones are in my upper left-hand pocket
and buttoned down.  Miss Portrait and I talked late and early and it
made everything much easier.'

'Do you love her more than me?'

'I'm not abnormal yet.  Perhaps that's bragging.  But she's lovely.'

'Where should we meet?'

'Should we have breakfast at the Florian, on the right-hand side of the
square?  The square should be flooded and it will be fun to watch.'

'I'll be there in twenty minutes if you want me.'

'I want you,' the Colonel said and hung up.

Coming out of the telephone booth he, suddenly, did not feel good and
then he felt as though the devil had him in an iron cage, built like an
iron lung or an iron maiden, and he walked, grey-faced, to the
concierge's desk and said, in Italian, 'Domenico, Ico, could you get me
a glass of water, please?'

The concierge was gone and he leaned on the desk resting.  He rested
lightly and without illusion.  Then the concierge was back with the
glass of water, and he took four tablets of the type that you take two,
and he continued resting as lightly as a hawk rests.

'Domenico,' he said.

'Yes.'

'I have something here in an envelope that you can put in the safe.  It
may be called for either by myself, in person, or in writing, or by the
person you have just put that call through to.  Would you like that in
writing?'

'No.  It would be unnecessary.'

'But what about you, boy?  You're not immortal, are you?'

'Fairly so,' the concierge told him.  'But I will put it in writing,
and after me, comes the Manager and the Assistant Manager.'

'Both good men,' the Colonel agreed.

'Wouldn't you like to sit down, my Colonel?'

'No.  Who sits down except men and women in change of life hotels?  Do
you sit down?'

'No.'

'I can rest on my feet, or against a God-damned tree.  My countrymen
sit down, or lie down, or fall down.  Give them a few energy crackers
to stall their whimpers.'

He was talking too much to regain confidence quickly.

'Do they really have energy crackers?'

'Sure.  It has something in it that keeps you from getting excited.
It's like the atomic bomb, only played backwards.'

'I can't believe it.'

'We have the most terrific military secrets that one General's wife
ever told another.  Energy crackers is the least of it.  Next time we
will give all Venice botulism from 56,000 feet.  There's nothing to
it,' the Colonel explained.  'They give you anthrax, and you give them
botulism.'

'But it will be horrible.'

'It will be worse than that,' the Colonel assured him.  'This isn't
classified.  It's all been published.  And while it goes on you can
hear Margaret, if you tune in right, singing the Star Spangled Banner
on the radio.  I think that could be arranged.  The voice I would not
describe as a big one.  Not as we know voices who have heard the good
ones in our time.  But everything is a trick now.  The radio can almost
make the voice.  And the Star Spangled Banner is fool-proof until
towards the last.'

'Do you think they will drop anything here?'

'No.  They never have.'

The Colonel, who was four star general now, in his wrath and in his
agony and in his need for confidence, but secured temporarily through
the absorption of the tablets, said, '_Ciao_, Domenico,' and left the
Gritti.

He figured it took twelve and one half minutes to reach the place where
his true love would probably arrive a little late.  He walked it
carefully and at the speed he should walk it.  The bridges were all the
same.




Chapter XXIV

His true love was at the table at the exact time that she said she
would be.  She was as beautiful as always In the hard, morning light
that came across the flooded square, and she said, 'Please, Richard.
Are you all right?  Please?'

'Sure,' the Colonel said.  'You wonder beauty.'

'Did you go to all our places in the market?'

'Only a few of them.  I did not go where they have the wild ducks.'

'Thank you.'

'For nothing,' the Colonel said.  'I never go there when we are not
together.'

'Don't you think I should go to the shoot?'

'No.  I am quite sure.  Alvarito would have asked you if he wanted you.'

'He might not have asked me because he wanted me.'

'That's true,' the Colonel said, and pondered that for two seconds.
'What do you want for breakfast?'

'Breakfast is worthless here, and I don't like the square when it is
flooded.  It is sad and the pigeons have no place to alight.  It is
only really fun towards the last when the children play.  Should we go
and have breakfast at the Gritti?'

'Do you want to?'

'Yes.'

'Good.  We'll have breakfast there.  I've had mine already.'

'Really?'

'I'll have some coffee and hot rolls, and only feel them with my
fingers.  Are you awfully hungry?'

'Awfully,' she said, truly.

'We'll give breakfast the full treatment,' the Colonel said.  'You'll
wish you had never heard of breakfast.'

As they walked, with the wind at their back, and her hair blowing
better than any banner, she asked him, holding close, 'Do you still
love me in the cold, hard Venice light of morning?  It is really cold
and hard, isn't it?'

'I love you and it is cold and hard.'

'I loved you all night when I was ski-ing in the dark.'

'How do you do that?'

'It is the same runs except that it is dark and the snow is dark
instead of light.  You ski the same; controlled and good.'

'Did you ski all night?  That would be many runs.'

'No.  Afterwards I slept soundly and well and I woke happy.  You were
with me and you were asleep like a baby.'

'I wasn't with you and I was not asleep.'

'You're with me now,' she said and held close and tight.

'And we are almost there.'

'Yes.'

'Have I told you, yet, properly, that I love you?'

'You told me.  But tell me again.'

'I love you,' he said.  'Take it frontally and formally please.'

'I take it anyway you want as long as it is true.'

'That's the proper attitude,' he said.  'You good, brave, lovely girl.
Turn your hair sideways once on top of this bridge and let it blow
obliquely.'

He had made a concession, with obliquely, instead of saying, correctly,
oblique.

'That's easy,' she said.  'Do you like it?'

He looked and saw the profile and the wonder early morning colour and
her chest upstanding in the black sweater and her eyes in the wind and
he said, 'Yes, I like it.'

'I'm very glad,' she said.




Chapter XXV

At the Gritti, the _Gran Maestro_ seated them at the table which was
beside the window that looked out on the Grand Canal.  There was no one
else in the dining-room.

The _Gran Maestro_ was festive and well with the morning.  He took his
ulcers day by day, and his heart the same way.  When they did not hurt
he did not hurt either.

'Your pitted compatriot eats in bed at his hotel, my colleague tells
me,' he confided to the Colonel.  'We may have a few Belgians.  "The
bravest of these were the Belgians,"' he quoted.  'There is a pair of
_pescecani_ from you know where.  But they are exhausted and I believe
they will eat, as pigs, in their room.'

'An excellent situation report,' the Colonel said.  'Our problem, _Gran
Maestro_, is that I have already eaten in my room as pitted does and as
the _pescecani_ will.  But this lady----'

'Young girl,' interrupted the _Gran Maestro_ with his whole-face smile.
He was feeling very good since it was a completely new day.

'This very young lady wants a breakfast to end breakfasts.'

'I understand,' the _Gran Maestro_ said, and he looked at Renata and
his heart rolled over as a porpoise does in the sea.  It is a beautiful
movement and only a few people in this world can feel it and accomplish
it.

'What do you want to eat, Daughter?' the Colonel asked, looking at her
early morning, un-retouched dark beauty.

'Everything.'

'Would you give any suggestions?'

'Tea instead of coffee and whatever the _Gran Maestro_ can salvage.'

'It won't be salvage, Daughter,' said the _Gran Maestro_.

'I'm the one who calls her Daughter.'

'I said it honestly,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'We can make or
_fabricar rognons_ grilled with _champignons_ dug by people I know.
Or, raised in damp cellars.  There can be an omelet with truffles dug
by pigs of distinction.  There can be real Canadian bacon from maybe
Canada, even.'

'Wherever that is,' the girl said happily and unillusioned.

'Wherever that is,' said the Colonel seriously.  'And I know damn well
where it is.'

'I think we should stop the jokes now and get to the breakfast.'

'If it is not un-maidenly I think so too.'

'Mine is a decanted flask of the Valpolicella.'

'Nothing else?'

'Bring me one ration of the alleged Canadian bacon,' the Colonel said.

He looked at the girl, since they were alone now, and he said, 'How are
you, my dearest?'

'Quite hungry, I suppose.  But thank you for being good for so long a
time.'

'It was easy,' the Colonel told her in Italian.




Chapter XXVI

They sat there at the table and watched the early stormy light over the
Canal.  The grey had turned to a yellow-grey now, with the sun, and the
waves were working against the outgoing tide.

'Mummy says she can't live here too long at any time because there are
no trees,' the girl said.  'That's why she goes to the country.'

'That's why everyone goes to the country,' the Colonel said.  'We could
plant a few trees if we found a place with a big enough garden.'

'I like Lombardy poplars and plane trees the best, but I am still quite
uneducated.'

'I like them, and cypresses and chestnut trees.  The real chestnut and
the horse-chestnut.  But you will never see trees, Daughter, until we
go to America.  Wait till you see a white pine or a ponderosa pine.'

'Will we see them when we make the long trip and stop at all the
filling stations or comfort stations or whatever they are called?'

'Lodges and Tourist Camps,' the Colonel said.  'Those others we stop
at; but not for the night.'

'I want so much for us to roll up to a comfort station and plank down
my money and tell them to fill her up and check the oil, Mac, the way
it is in American books or in the films.'

'That's a filling station.'

'Then what is a comfort station?'

'Where you go, you know----'

'Oh,' the girl said and blushed.  'I'm sorry.'

'I want to learn American so much.  But I suppose I shall say barbarous
things the way you do sometimes in Italian.'

'It is an easy language.  The further West you go the straighter and
the easier it becomes.'

The _Gran Maestro_ brought the breakfast and the odour of it, although
it did not spread through the room, due to the silver covers on the
dishes, came to them steady and as broiled bacon and kidneys, with the
dark lustreless smell of grilled mushrooms added.

'It looks lovely,' the girl said.  'Thank you very much, _Gran
Maestro_.  Should I talk American?' she asked the Colonel.  She
extended her hand to the _Gran Maestro_ lightly, and fastly, so that it
darted as a rapier does, and said, 'Put it there, Pal.  This grub is
tops.'

The _Gran Maestro_ said, 'Thank you, my lady.'

'Should I have said chow instead of grub?' the girl asked the Colonel.

'They are really interchangeable.'

'Did they talk like that out West when you were a boy?  What would you
say at breakfast?'

'Breakfast was served, or offered up, by the cook.  He would say, "Come
and get it, you sons of bitches, or I'll throw it away."'

'I must learn that for in the country.  Sometimes when we have the
British Ambassador and his dull wife for dinner I will teach the
footman, who will announce dinner, to say, "Come and get it, you sons
of bitches, or we will throw it away."'

'He'd devaluate,' the Colonel said.  'At any rate, it would be an
interesting experiment.'

'Tell me something I can say in true American to the pitted one if he
comes in.  I will just whisper it in his ear as though I were making a
rendezvous, as they did in the old days.'

'It would depend on how he looks.  If he is very dejected looking, you
might whisper to him, "Listen, Mac.  You hired out to be tough, didn't
you?"'

'That's lovely,' she said, and repeated it in a voice she had learned
from Ida Lupino.  'Can I say it to the _Gran Maestro_?'

'Sure.  Why not.  _Gran Maestro_!'

The _Gran Maestro_ came over and leaned forward attentively.

'Listen, Mac.  You hired out to be tough, didn't you?' the girl
hard-worded him.

'I did indeed,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'Thank you for stating it so
exactly.'

'If that one comes in and you wish to speak to him after he has eaten,
just whisper in his ear, "Wipe the egg off your chin, Jack, and
straighten up and fly right."'

'I'll remember it and I'll practise it at home.'

'What are we going to do after breakfast?'

'Should we go up and look at the picture and see if it is of any value;
I mean any good; in the daylight?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.




Chapter XXVII

Upstairs the room was already done and the Colonel, who had anticipated
a possible messiness of locale, was pleased.

'Stand by it once,' he said.  Then remembered to add, 'Please.'

She stood by it, and he looked at it from where he had looked at it
last night.

'There's no comparison, of course,' he said.  'I don't mean likeness.
The likeness is excellent.'

'Was there supposed to be a comparison?' the girl asked, and swung her
head back and stood there with the black sweater of the portrait.

'Of course not.  But last night, and at first light, I talked to the
portrait as though it were you.'

'That was nice of you and shows it has served some useful purpose.'

They were lying now on the bed and the girl said to him, 'Don't you
ever close windows?'

'No.  Do you?'

'Only when it rains.'

'How much alike are we?'

'I don't know.  We never had much of a chance to find out.'

'We've never had a fair chance.  But we've had enough of a chance for
me to know.'

'And when you know what the hell have you got?' the Colonel asked.

'I don't know.  Something better than there is, I suppose.'

'Sure.  We ought to try for that.  I don't believe in limited
objectives.  Sometimes you're forced to, though.'

'What is your great sorrow?'

'Other people's orders,' he said.  'What's yours?'

'You.'

'I don't want to be a sorrow.  I've been a sorry son of a bitch many
times.  But I never was anybody's sorrow.'

'Well you are mine now.'

'All right,' he said.  'We'll take it that way.'

'You're nice to take it that way.  You're very kind this morning.  I'm
so ashamed about how things are.  Please hold me very close and let's
not talk, or think, about how things might have been different.'

'Daughter, that's one of the few things I know how to do.'

'You know many, many things.  Don't say such a thing.'

'Sure,' the Colonel said.  'I know how to fight forwards and how to
fight backwards and what else?'

'About pictures and about books and about life.'

'That's easy.  You just look at the pictures without prejudice, and you
read the books with as open a mind as you have, and you live life.'

'Don't take off your tunic, please.'

'All right.'

'You do anything when I say please.'

'I have done things without.'

'Not very often.'

'No,' the Colonel agreed.  'Please is a pretty word.'

'Please, please, please.'

'_Per Piacere_.  It means for pleasure.  I wish we always talked
Italian.'

'We could in the dark.  Although there are things that say better in
English.

'I love you my last true and only love,' she quoted.  'When lilacs last
in the door-yard bloomed.  And out of the cradle endlessly rocking.
And come and get it, you sons of bitches, or I'll throw it away.  You
don't want those in other languages, do you, Richard?'

'No.'

'Kiss me again, please.'

'Unnecessary please.'

'I would probably end up as an unnecessary please myself.  That is the
good thing about you going to die that you can't leave me.'

'That's a little rough,' the Colonel said.  'Watch your beautiful mouth
a little on that.'

'I get rough when you get rough,' she said.  'You wouldn't want me to
be completely otherwise?'

'I would not want you to be in any way other than you are and I love
you truly, finally and for good.'

'You say nice things very clearly sometimes.  What was it happened with
you and your wife, if I may ask?'

'She was an ambitious woman and I was away too much.'

'You mean she went away, from ambition, when you only were away from
duty?'

'Sure,' the Colonel said and remembered, as unbitterly as he could.
'She had more ambition than Napoleon and about the talent of the
average High School Valedictorian.'

'Whatever that is,' the girl said.  'But let's not speak about her.
I'm sorry I asked the question.  She must be sad that she is not with
you.'

'No.  She is too conceited ever to be sad, and she married me to
advance herself in Army circles, and have better contacts for what she
considered her profession, or her art.  She was a journalist.'

'But they are dreadful,' the girl said.

'I agree.'

'But you couldn't have married a woman journalist that kept on being
that?'

'I told you I made mistakes,' the Colonel said.

'Let's talk about something nice.'

'Let's.'

'But that was terrible.  How could you have done such a thing?'

'I don't know.  I could tell you in detail but let's skip it.'

'Please let's skip it.  But I had no idea it was something as awful as
that.  You wouldn't do such a thing now, would you?'

'I promise you, my sweet.'

'But you don't ever write to her?'

'Of course not.'

'You wouldn't tell her about us, so she could write about it?'

'No.  I told her about things once, and she wrote about them.  But that
was in another country and besides the wench is dead.'

'Is she really dead?'

'Deader than Phoebus the Phoenician.  But she doesn't know it yet.'

'What would you do if we were together in the Piazza and you saw her?'

'I'd look straight through her to show her how dead she was.'

'Thank you very much,' the girl said.  'You know that another woman, or
a woman in memory, is a terrible thing for a young girl to deal with
when she is still without experience.'

'There isn't any other woman,' the Colonel told her, and his eyes were
bad and remembering.  'Nor is there any woman of memory.'

'Thank you, very much,' the girl said.  'When I look at you I believe
it truly.  But please never look at me nor think of me like that.'

'Should we hunt her down and hang her to a high tree?' the Colonel said
with anticipation.

'No.  Let us forget her.'

'She is forgotten,' the Colonel said.  And, strangely enough, she was.
It was strange because she had been present in the room for a moment,
and she had very nearly caused a panic; which is one of the strangest
things there is, the Colonel thought.  He knew about panics.

But she was gone now, for good and for ever; cauterized; exorcized and
with the eleven copies of her re-classification papers, in which was
included the formal, notarized act of divorcement, in triplicate.

'She is forgotten,' the Colonel said.  It was quite true.

'I'm so pleased,' the girl said.  'I don't know why they ever let her
into the hotel.'

'We're enough alike,' the Colonel said.  'We better not carry it too
God-damned far.'

'You can hang her if you wish because she is why we cannot marry.'

'She's forgotten,' the Colonel told her.  'Maybe she will take a good
look at herself in the mirror sometime and hang herself.'

'Now that she is out of the room we should wish her no bad luck.  But,
as a good Venetian, I wish that she were dead.'

'So do I,' the Colonel said.  'And now, since she is not, let us forget
her for keeps.'

'For keeps and for always,' the girl said.  'I hope that is the correct
diction.  Or in Spanish _para sempre_.'

'_Para sempre_ and his brother,' the Colonel said.




Chapter XXVIII

They lay together now and did not speak and the Colonel felt her heart
beat.  It is easy to feel a heart beat under a black sweater knitted by
someone in the family, and her dark hair lay, long and heavy, over his
good arm.  It isn't heavy, he thought, it is lighter than anything
there is.  She lay, quiet and loving, and whatever it was that they
possessed was in complete communication.  He kissed her on the mouth,
gently and hungrily, and then it was as though there was static,
suddenly, when communications had been perfect.

'Richard,' she said.  'I'm sorry about things.'

'Never be sorry,' the Colonel said.  'Never discuss casualties,
Daughter.'

'Say it again.'

'Daughter.'

'Will you tell me some happy things I can have for during the week and
some more of war for my education?'

'Let's skip war.'

'No.  I need it for my education.'

'I do too,' the Colonel said.  'Not manoeuvres.  You know, in our army
once, a general officer through chicanery obtained the plan of the
manoeuvre.  He anticipated every move of the enemy force and comported
himself so brilliantly that he was promoted over many better men.  And
that was why we got smacked one time.  That and the prevalence of
week-ends.'

'We're on a week-end now.'

'I know,' the Colonel said.  'I can still count up to seven.'

'But are you bitter about everything?'

'No.  It is just that I am half a hundred years old and I know things.'

'Tell me something more about Paris because I love to think of you and
Paris in the week.'

'Daughter, why don't you lay off Paris?'

'But I've been in Paris, and I will go back there again, and I want to
know.  It is the loveliest city in the world, next to our own, and I
want to know some things truly to take with me.'

'We will go together and I will tell you there.'

'Thank you.  But tell me a little now for this week only.'

'Leclerc was a high-born jerk as I think that I've explained.  Very
brave, very arrogant and extremely ambitious.  He is dead, as I said.'

'Yes, you told me.'

'They say you should never speak ill of the dead.  But I think it is
the best time to speak truly of them.  I have never said anything of a
dead that I would not say to his face,' and he added, 'in spades.'

'Let's not talk about him.  I have re-classified him in my mind.'

'What do you want then; picturesque?'

'Yes please.  I have bad taste from reading the illustrated papers.
But I will read Dante all week while you are gone.  I'll go to mass
each morning.  That should be enough.'

'Go to Harry's before lunch too.'

'I will,' she said.  'Please tell me some picturesque.'

'Don't you think we might better just go to sleep?'

'How can we go to sleep now when we have so little time?  Feel this,'
she said and pushed her whole head up under his chin until she forced
his head back.

'All right, I'll talk.'

'Give me your hand first to hold.  I'll have it in my hand when I read
the Dante and do the other things.'

'Dante was an execrable character.  More conceited than Leclerc.'

'I know.  But he did not write execrably.'

'No.  Leclerc could fight too.  Excellently.'

'Now tell me.'

Her head was on his chest now, and the Colonel said, 'Why did you not
want me to take off the tunic?'

'I like to feel the buttons.  Is it wrong?'

'I'll be a sad son of a bitch,' the Colonel said.  'How many people
fought in your family?'

'Everybody,' she said.  'Always.  They were traders as well and several
of them were Doges of this city as you know.'

'But they all fought?'

'All,' she said.  'As far as I know.'

'O.K.,' the Colonel said.  'I'll tell you any God-damn thing you want
to know.'

'Just something picturesque.  As bad or worse than in the illustrated
papers.'

'_Domenica Del Corriere_ or _Tribuna Illustrata_?'

'Worse, if possible.'

'Kiss me first.'

She kissed him kind, and hard, and desperately, and the Colonel could
not think about any fights or any picturesque or strange incidents.  He
only thought of her and how she felt and how close life comes to death
when there is ecstasy.  And what the hell is ecstasy and what's
ecstasy's rank and serial number?  And how does her black sweater feel?
And who made all her smoothness and delight and the strange pride and
sacrifice and wisdom of a child?  Yes, ecstasy is what you might have
had and instead you draw sleep's other brother.

Death is a lot of ----, he thought.  It comes to you in small fragments
that hardly show where it has entered.  It comes, sometimes,
atrociously.  It can come from unboiled water; an un-pulled-up mosquito
boot, or it can come with the great, white-hot, clanging roar we have
lived with.  It comes in small cracking whispers that precede the noise
of the automatic weapon.  It can come with the smoke-emitting arc of
the grenade, or the sharp, cracking drop of the mortar.

I have seen it come, loosening itself from the bomb rack, and falling
with that strange curve.  It comes in the metallic rending crash of a
vehicle, or the simple lack of traction on a slippery road.

It comes in bed to most people, I know, like love's opposite number.  I
have lived with it nearly all my life and the dispensing of it has been
my trade.  But what can I tell this girl now on this cold, windy
morning in the Gritti Palace Hotel?

'What would you like to know, Daughter?' he asked her.

'Everything.'

'All right,' the Colonel said.  'Here goes.'




Chapter XXIX

They lay on the pleasantly hard, new-made bed with their legs pressed
tight against one another, and her head was on his chest, and her hair
spread across his old hard neck; and he told her.

'We landed without much opposition.  They had the true opposition at
the other beach.  Then we had to link up with the people who had been
dropped, and take and secure various towns, and then we took Cherbourg.
This was difficult, and had to be done very fast, and the orders were
from a General called Lightning Joe that you never would have heard of.
Good General.'

'Go on, please.  You spoke about Lightning Joe before.'

'After Cherbourg we had everything.  I took nothing but an admiral's
compass because I had a small boat at that time on Chesapeake Bay.  But
we had all the Wehrmacht stamped Martell and some people had as much as
six million German-printed French francs.  They were good until a year
ago, and at that time they were worth fifty to the dollar, and many a
man has a tractor now instead of simply one mule who knew how to send
them home through his Esses, or sometimes his Gs.

'I never stole anything except the compass because I thought it was bad
luck to steal, unnecessarily, in war.  But I drank the cognac and I
used to try to figure out the different corrections on the compass when
I had time.  The compass was the only friend I had, and the telephone
was my life.  We had more wire strung than there are ---- in Texas.'

'Please keep telling me and be as little rough as you can.  I don't
know what the word means and I don't want to know.'

'Texas is a big state,' the Colonel said.  'That is why I used it and
its female population as a symbol.  You cannot say more ---- than
Wyoming because there are less than thirty thousand there, perhaps,
hell, make it fifty, and there was a lot of wire, and you kept
stringing it and rolling it up, and stringing it again.'

'Go on.'

'We will cut to the break-through,' the Colonel said.  'Please tell me
if this bores you.'

'No.'

'So we made the mucking break-through,' the Colonel said, and now his
head was turned to her head, and he was not lecturing; he was
confessing.

'The first day most of them came over and dropped the Christmas tree
ornaments that confuse the other people's radar and it was called off.
We were ready to go but they called it off.  Quite properly I am sure.
I love the very high brass like I love the pig's you know.'

'Tell it to me and don't be bad.'

'Conditions were not propitious,' the Colonel said.  'So the second day
we were for it, as our British cousins, who could not fight their way
out of a wet tissue towel, say, and over came the people of the wild,
blue yonder.

'They were still taking off from the fields where they lived on that
green-grassed aircraft carrier that they called England, when we saw
the first of them.

'Shining, bright and beautiful, because they had scraped the invasion
paint by then, or maybe they had not.  My memory is not exact about
this part.

'Anyway, Daughter, you could see the line of them going back towards
the east further than you could see.  It was like a great train.  They
were high in the sky and never more beautiful.  I told my S-2 that we
should call them the Valhalla Express.  Are you tired of it?'

'No.  I can see the Valhalla Express.  We never saw it in such numbers.
But we saw it.  Many times.'

'We were back two thousand yards from where we were to take off from.
You know what two thousand yards is, Daughter, in a war when you are
attacking?'

'No.  How could I?'

'Then the front part of the Valhalla Express dropped coloured smoke and
turned and went home.  This smoke was dropped accurately, and clearly
showed the target which was the Kraut positions.  They were good
positions and it _might_ have been impossible to move him out of them
without something mighty and picturesque such as we were experiencing.

'Then, Daughter, the next sections of the Valhalla Express dropped
everything in the world on the Krauts and where they lived and worked
to hold us up.  Later it looked as though all of the earth had erupted
and the prisoners that we took shook as a man shakes when his malaria
hits him.  They were very brave boys from the Sixth Parachute Division
and they all shook and could not control it though they tried.

'So you can see it was a good bombing.  Just the thing we always need
in this life.  Make them tremble in the fear of justice and of might.

'So then, Daughter, not to bore you, the wind was from the east and the
smoke began to blow back in our direction.  The heavies were bombing on
the smoke line and the smoke line was now over us.  Therefore they
bombed us the same as they had bombed the Krauts.  First it was the
heavies, and no one need ever worry about hell who was there that day.
Then, to really make the break-through good and to leave as few people
as possible on either side, the mediums came over and bombed who was
left.  Then we made the break-through as soon as the Valhalla Express
had gone home, stretching in its beauty and its majesty from that part
of France to all over England.'

If a man has a conscience, the Colonel thought, he might think about
air-power some time.

'Give me a glass of that Valpolicella,' the Colonel said, and
remembered to add, 'please.'

'Excuse me,' he said.  'Be comfortable, honey dog, please.  You asked
me to tell you.'

'I'm not your honey dog.  That must be someone else.'

'Correct.  You're my last and true and only love.  Is that correct?
But you asked me to tell you.'

'Please tell me,' the girl said.  'I'd like to be your honey dog if I
knew how to do it.  But I am only a girl from this town that loves you.'

'We'll operate on that,' the Colonel said.  'And I love you.  I
probably picked up that phrase in the Philippines.'

'Probably,' the girl said.  'But I would rather be your straight girl.'

'You are,' the Colonel said.  'Complete with handles and with the flag
on top.'

'Please don't be rough,' she said.  'Please love me true and tell me as
true as you can, without hurting yourself in any way.'

'I'll tell you true,' he said.  'As true as I can tell and let it hurt
who it hurts.  It is better that you hear it from me if you have
curiosity on this subject, than that you read it in some book with
stiff covers.'

'Please don't be rough.  Just tell me true and hold me tight and tell
me true until you are purged of it; if that can be.'

'I don't need to purge,' he said.  'Except heavies being used
tactically.  I have nothing against them if they use them right even if
they kill you.  But for ground support give me a man like Pete Quesada.
There is a man who will boot them in.'

'Please.'

'If you ever want to quit a beat-up character like me that guy could
give you ground support.'

'You are not beat-up, whatever that is, and I love you.'

'Please give me two tablets from that bottle and pour the glass of
Valpolicella that you neglected to pour, and I will tell you some of
the rest of it.'

'You don't have to.  You don't have to tell me and I know now it is not
good for you.  Especially not the Valhalla Express day.  I am not an
inquisitor; or whatever the female of inquisitor is.  Let us just lie
quietly and look out of the window, and watch and see what happens on
our Grand Canal.'

'Maybe we better.  Who gives a damn about the war anyway?'

'You and me, maybe,' she said and stroked his head.  'Here are the two
things from the square bottle.  Here is the glass of decanted vino.
I'll send you better from our own estates.  Please let us sleep a
little while.  Please be a good boy and we just lie together and love
each other.  Please put your hand here.'

'My good or my bad?'

'Your bad,' the girl said.  'The one I love and must think about all
week.  I cannot keep it like you keep the stones.'

'They're in the safe,' the Colonel said.  'In your name,' he added.

'Let's just sleep and not talk about any material things nor any
sorrows.'

'The hell with sorrows,' the Colonel said with his eyes closed and his
head resting lightly on the black sweater that was his fatherland.  You
have to have some damned fatherland, he thought.  Here is mine.

'Why aren't you President?' the girl asked.  'You could be an excellent
president.'

'Me president?  I served in the Montana National Guard when I was
sixteen.  But I never wore a bow tie in my life and I am not, nor ever
have been, an unsuccessful haberdasher.  I have none of the
qualifications for the Presidency.  I couldn't even head the opposition
even though I don't have to sit on telephone books to have my picture
taken.  Nor am I a no-fight general.  Hell, I never even was at SHAEF.
I couldn't even be an elder statesman.  I'm not old enough.  Now we are
governed in some way, by the dregs.  We are governed by what you find
in the bottom of dead beer glasses that whores have dunked their
cigarettes in.  The place has not even been swept out yet and they have
an amateur pianist beating on the box.'

'I don't understand it because my American is so incomplete.  But it
sounds awful.  But don't be angry about it.  Let me be angry for you.'

'Do you know what an unsuccessful haberdasher is?'

'No.'

'It is not discreditable.  There are many of them in our country.
There is at least one in every town.  No, Daughter, I am only a
fighting soldier and that is the lowest thing on earth.  In that you
run for Arlington, if they return the body.  The family has a choice.'

'Is Arlington nice?'

'I don't know,' the Colonel said.  'I was never buried there.'

'Where would you like to be buried?'

'Up in the hills,' he said, making a quick decision.  'On any part of
the high ground where we beat them.'

'I suppose you should be buried on the Grappa.'

'On the dead angle of any shell-pocked slope if they would graze cattle
over me in the summer time.'

'Do they have cattle there?'

'Sure.  They always have cattle where there is good grass in the
summer, and the girls of the highest houses, the strong built ones, the
houses _and_ the girls, that resist the snow in winter, trap foxes in
the fall after they bring the cattle down.  They feed from pole-stacked
hay.'

'And you don't want Arlington or Père Lachaise or what we have here?'

'Your miserable boneyard.'

'I know it is the most unworthy thing about the town.  The city rather.
I learned to call cities towns from you.  But I will see that you go
where you wish to go and I will go with you if you like.'

'I would not like.  That is the one thing we do alone.  Like going to
the bathroom.'

'Please do not be rough.'

'I meant that I would love to have you with me.  But it is very
egotistical and an ugly process.'

He stopped, and thought truly, but off-key, and said, 'No.  You get
married and have five sons and call them all Richard.'

'The lion-hearted,' the girl said, accepting the situation without even
a glance, and playing what there was she held as you put down all the
cards, having counted exactly.

'The louse-hearted,' the Colonel said.  'The unjust bitter criticizer
who speaks badly of everyone.'

'Please don't be rough in talking,' the girl said.  'And remember you
speak worst of all about yourself.  But hold me as close as we can and
let's think about nothing.'

He held her as close as he could and he tried to think about nothing.




Chapter XXX

The colonel and the girl lay quietly on the bed and the Colonel tried
to think of nothing; as he had thought of nothing so many times in so
many places.  But it was no good now.  It would not work any more
because it was too late.

They were not Othello and Desdemona, thank God, although it was the
same town and the girl was certainly better looking than the
Shakespearean character, and the Colonel had fought as many, or more
times than the garrulous Moor.

They are excellent soldiers, he thought.  The damned Moors.  But how
many of them have we killed in my time?  I think we killed more than a
generation if you count the final Moroccan campaign against Abdel Krim.
And each one you have to kill separately.  Nobody ever killed them in
mass, as we killed Krauts before they discovered _Einheit_.

'Daughter,' he said.  'Do you want me to really tell you, so you will
know, if I am not rough telling it?'

'I would rather have you tell me than anything.  Then we can share it.'

'It cuts pretty thin for sharing,' the Colonel said.  'It's all yours,
Daughter.  And it's only the high-lights.  You wouldn't understand the
campaigns in detail, and few others would.  Rommel might.  But they
always had him under wraps in France and, besides, we had destroyed his
communications.  The two tactical air-forces had; ours and the R.A.F.
But I wish I could talk over certain things with him.  I'd like to talk
with him and with Ernst Udet.'

'Just tell me what you wish and take this glass of Valpolicella and
stop if it makes you feel badly.  Or don't tell it at all.'

'I was a spare-parts Colonel at the start,' the Colonel explained
carefully.  'They are hang-around Colonels, which are given to a
Division Commander to replace one that he may have killed, or that is
relieved.  Almost none are killed; but many are relieved.  All the good
ones are promoted.  Fairly fast when the thing starts to move sort of
like a forest fire.'

'Go on, please.  Should you take your medicine?'

'The hell with my medicine,' the Colonel said.  'And the hell with
SHAEF.'

'You explained that to me,' the girl said.

'I wish the hell you were a soldier with your straight true brain and
your beauty memory.'

'I would wish to be a soldier if I could fight under you.'

'Never fight under me,' the Colonel said.  'I'm cagey.  But I'm not
lucky.  Napoleon wanted them lucky and he was right.'

'We've had some luck.'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'Good and bad.'

'But it was all luck.'

'Sure,' the Colonel said.  'But you can't fight on luck.  It is just
something that you need.  The people who fought on luck are all
gloriously dead like Napoleon's horse cavalry.'

'Why do you hate cavalry?  Almost all the good boys I know were in the
three good regiments of cavalry, or in the navy.'

'I don't hate anything, Daughter,' the Colonel said, and drank a little
of the light, dry, red wine which was as friendly as the house of your
brother, if you and your brother are good friends.  'I only have a
point of view, arrived at after careful consideration, and an estimate
of their capabilities.'

'Are they not really good?'

'They are worthless,' the Colonel said.  Then remembering to be kind,
added, 'In our time.'

'Every day is a disillusion.'

'No.  Every day is a new and fine illusion.  But you can cut out
everything phoney about the illusion as though you would cut it with a
straight-edge razor.'

'Please never cut me.'

'You're not cut-able.'

'Would you kiss me and hold me tight, and we both look at the Grand
Canal where the light is lovely now, and you tell me more?'

When they were looking out at the Grand Canal where the light was,
indeed, lovely, the Colonel went on, 'I got a regiment because the
Commanding General relieved a boy that I had known since he was
eighteen years old.  He was not a boy any more, of course.  It was too
much regiment for him and it was all the regiment I ever could have
hoped for in this life until I lost it.'  He added, 'Under orders, of
course.'

'How do you lose a regiment?'

'When you are working around to get up on the high ground and all you
would have to do is send in a flag, and they would talk it over and
come out if you were right.  The professionals are very intelligent and
these Krauts were all professionals; not the fanatics.  The phone rings
and somebody calls from Corps who has his orders from Army or maybe
Army Group or maybe even SHAEF, because they read the name of the town
in a newspaper, possibly sent in from Spa, by a correspondent, and the
order is to take it by assault.  It's important because it got into the
newspapers.  You have to take it.

'So you leave one company dead along a draw.  You lose one company
complete and you destroy three others.  The tanks get smacked even as
fast as they could move and they could move fast both ways.

'They hit them one, two, three, four, five.

'Three men usually get out of the five (that are inside) and they run
like broken-field runners that have been shaken loose in a play when
you are in Minnesota and the others are Beloit, Wisconsin.

'Do I bore you?'

'No.  I do not understand the local allusions.  But you can explain
them when you care to.  Please keep on telling me.'

'You get into the town, and some handsome jerk puts an air mission on
you.  This mission might have been ordered and never cancelled.  Let's
give everyone the benefit of the doubt.  I'm just telling you about
things in a general way.  It is better not to be specific and a
civilian wouldn't understand it.  Not even you.

'This air mission does not help much, Daughter.  Because maybe you
cannot stay in the town because you have got too few people in, and by
now, you are digging them out of rubble; or leaving them in rubble.
There are two schools of thought on that.  So they say to take it by
assault.  They repeat this.

'This has been rigidly confirmed by some politician in uniform who has
never killed in his life, except with his mouth over the telephone, or
on paper, nor ever has been hit.  Figure him as our next President if
you want him.  Figure him any way you like.  But figure him and his
people, the whole great business establishment, so far back that the
best way to communicate with them rapidly would be by racing carrier
pigeons.  Except, with the amount of security they maintained for their
proper persons, they would probably have their anti-aircraft shoot the
pigeons down.  If they could hit them.

'So you do it again.  Then I will tell you what it looks like.'

The Colonel looked up at the play of the light on the ceiling.  It was
reflected, in part, from the Canal.  It made strange, but steady
movements, changing, as the current of a trout stream changes, but
remaining, still changing as the sun moved.

Then he looked at his great beauty, with her strange, dark, grown-up
child's face that broke his heart, that he would be leaving before 1335
(that was sure) and he said, 'Let's not talk about the war, Daughter.'

'Please,' she said.  'Please.  Then I will have it all this week.'

'That's a short sentence.  I mean using the word sentence as a jail
sentence.'

'You don't know how long a week can be when you are nineteen.'

'Several times I have known how long an hour can be,' the Colonel said.
'I could tell you how long two minutes and a half can be.'

'Please tell me.'

'Well, I had two days' leave in Paris between the Schnee-Eifel fight
and this one, and due to my friendship with one or two people I was
privileged to be present at some sort of a meeting, where only the
accredited and trusted were present, and General Walter Bedell Smith
explained to all of us how easy the operation that later took the name
of Hurtgen Forest would be.  It was not really Hurtgen Forest.  That
was only a small sector.  It was the Stadtswald and it was where the
German High Command had figured, exactly, to fight after Aachen had
been taken and the road into Germany breached.  I hope I am not boring
you.'

'You never bore me.  Nothing about fighting bores me except lies.'

'You're a strange girl.'

'Yes,' she said.  'I've known that for quite a long time.'

'Would you really like to fight?'

'I don't know if I could do it.  But I could try if you taught me.'

'I'll never teach you.  I'll just tell you anecdotes.'

'Sad stories of the death of kings.'

'No.  GIs somebody christened them.  God how I hate that word and how
it was used.  Comic book readers.  All from some certain place.  Most
of them there unwillingly.  Not all.  But they all read a paper called
"The Stars and Stripes" and you had to get your unit into it, or you
were unsuccessful as a commander.  I was mostly unsuccessful.  I tried
to like the correspondents and there were some very good ones present
at this meeting.  I will not name names because I might omit some fine
ones and that would be unjust.  There were good ones that I don't
remember.  Then, there were draft dodgers, phonies who claimed that
they were wounded if a piece of spent metal ever touched them, people
who wore the purple heart from jeep accidents, insiders, cowards,
liars, thieves and telephone racers.  There were a few deads missing
from this briefing.  They had deads too.  A big percentage.  But none
of the deads were present as I said.  They had women at it though in
wonderful uniforms.'

'But how did you ever marry one?'

'By mistake as I explained before.'

'Go on and tell me.'

'There were more maps in the room than Our Lord could read on his best
day,' the Colonel continued.  'There were the Big Picture, the Semi-Big
Picture and the Super-Big-Picture.  All these people pretended to
understand them, as did the boys with the pointers, a sort of
half-arsed billiard cue that they used for explanation.'

'Don't say rough words.  I don't know, even, what half-arsed means.'

'Shortened, or abbreviated in an inefficient manner,' the Colonel
explained.  'Or deficient as an instrument, or in character.  It's an
old word.  You could probably find it in Sanscrit.'

'Please tell me.'

'What for?  Why should I perpetuate ignominy just with my mouth?'

'I'll write it if you want.  I can write truly what I hear or think.  I
would make mistakes of course.'

'You are a lucky girl if you can write truly what you hear or think.
But don't you ever write one word of this.'

He resumed, 'The place is full of correspondents dressed according to
their taste.  Some are cynical and some are extremely eager.

'To ride herd on them, and to wield the pointers, there is a group of
pistol-slappers.  We call a pistol-slapper a non-fighting man,
disguised in uniform, or you might even call it costume, who gets
excited every time the weapon slaps against his thighs.  Incidentally,
Daughter, the weapon, not the old pistol, the real pistol, has missed
more people in combat than probably any weapon in the world.  Don't
ever let anyone give you one unless you want to hit people on the head
with it in Harry's Bar.'

'I never wanted to hit anyone; except perhaps Andrea.'

'If you ever hit Andrea, hit him with the barrel; not with the butt.
The butt is awfully slow, and it misses and if it lands you get blood
on your hands when you put the gun away.  Also please do not ever hit
Andrea because he is my friend.  I do not think he would be easy to hit
either.'

'No.  I do not think so either.  Please tell me some more about the
meeting, or the assembly.  I think I could recognize a pistol-slapper
now.  But I would like to be checked out more thoroughly.'

'Well, the pistol-slappers, in all the pride of their pistol-slappery,
were awaiting the arrival of the great General who was to explain the
operation.

'The correspondents were muttering, or twittering, and the intelligent
ones were glum or passively cheerful.  Everybody sat on folding chairs
as for a Chautauqua lecture.  I'm sorry about these local terms; but we
are a local people.

'In comes the General.  He is no pistol-slapper, but a big business
man; an excellent politician, the executive type.  The Army is the
biggest business, at that moment, in the world.  He takes the
half-assed pointer, and he shows us, with complete conviction, and
without forebodings, exactly what the attack will be, why we are making
it, and how facilely it will succeed.  There is no problem.'

'Go on,' the girl said.  'Please let me fill your glass and you, please
look at the light on the ceiling.'

'Fill it and I'll look at the light and I will go on.

'This high pressure salesman, and I say this with no disrespect, but
with admiration for all his talents, or his talent, also told what we
would have of the necessary.  There would be no lack of anything.  The
organization called SHAEF was then based on a town named Versailles
outside of Paris.  We would attack to the east of Aachen a distance of
some 380 kilometres from where they were based.

'An army can get to be huge; but you can close up a little bit.  They
finally went as far forward as Rheims which was 240 kilometres from the
fighting.  That was many months later.

'I understand the necessity of the big executive being removed from
contact with his working people.  I understand about the size of the
army and the various problems.  I even understand logistics which is
not difficult.  But no one ever commanded from that far back in
history.'

'Tell me about the town.'

'I'll tell you,' the Colonel said.  'But I don't want to hurt you.'

'You never hurt me.  We are an old town and we had fighting men,
always.  We respect them more than all others and I hope we understand
them a little.  We also know they are difficult.  Usually, as people,
they are very boring to women.'

'Do I bore you?'

'What do you think?' the girl asked.

'I bore myself, Daughter.'

'I don't think you do, Richard, you would not have done something all
your life if you were bored by it.  Don't lie to me, please, darling,
when we have so little time.

'I won't.'

'Don't you see you need to tell me things to purge your bitterness?'

'I know I tell them to you.'

'Don't you know I want you to die with the grace of a happy death?  Oh,
I'm getting all mixed up.  Don't let me get too mixed up.'

'I won't, Daughter.'

'Tell me some more, please, and be just as bitter as you want.'




Chapter XXXI

'Listen, Daughter,' the Colonel said.  'Now we will cut out all
references to glamour and to high brass, even from Kansas, where the
brass grows higher than osage-orange trees along your own road.  It
bears a fruit you can't eat and it is purely Kansan.  Nobody but
Kansans ever had anything to do with it; except maybe us who fought.
We ate them every day.  Osage oranges,' he added.  'Only we called them
K Rations.  They weren't bad.  C Rations were bad.  Ten in ones were
good.

'So we fought.  It is dull but it is informative.  This is the way it
goes if anyone is ever interested; which I doubt.

'It goes like this: 1300 Red S-3: White jumped off in time.  Red said
they were waiting to tie in behind White.  1305 (that is one o'clock
and five minutes after in the afternoon, if you can remember that,
Daughter) Blue S-3, you know what an S-3 is, I hope, says, "Let us know
when you move."  Red said they were waiting to tie in behind White.

'You can see how easy it is,' the Colonel told the girl.  'Everybody
ought to do it before breakfast.'

'We cannot all be combat infantrymen,' the girl told him softly.  'I
respect it more than anything except good, honest fliers.  Please talk,
I'm taking care of you.'

'Good fliers are very good and should be respected as such,' the
Colonel said.

He looked up at the light on the ceiling and he was completely
desperate at the remembrance of his loss of his battalions, and of
individual people.  He could never hope to have such a regiment, ever.
He had not built it.  He had inherited it.  But, for a time, it had
been his great joy.  Now every second man in it was dead and the others
nearly all were wounded.  In the belly, the head, the feet or the
hands, the neck, the back, the lucky buttocks, the unfortunate chest
and the other places.  Tree burst wounds hit men where they would never
be wounded in open country.  And all the wounded were wounded for life.

'It was a good regiment,' he said.  'You might even say it was a
beautiful regiment until I destroyed it under other people's orders.'

'But why do you have to obey them when you know better?'

'In our army you obey like a dog,' the Colonel explained.  'You always
hope you have a good master.'

'What kind of masters do you get?'

'I've only had two good ones so for.  After I reached a certain level
of command, many nice people, but only two good masters.'

'Is that why you are not a General now?  I would love it if you were a
General.'

'I'd love it too,' the Colonel said.  'But maybe not with the same
intensity.'

'Would you try to sleep, please, to please me?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.

'You see, I thought that if you slept you might get rid of them, just
being asleep.'

'Yes.  Thank you very much,' he said.

There was nothing to it, gentlemen.  All a man need ever do is obey.




Chapter XXXII

'You slept quite well for a time,' the girl told him, lovingly and
gently.  'Is there anything you would like me to do?'

'Nothing,' the Colonel said.  'Thank you.'

Then he turned bad and he said, 'Daughter, I could sleep good straight
up and down in the electric chair with my pants slit and my hair
clipped.  I sleep as, and when, I need it.'

'I can never be like that,' the girl said, sleepily.  'I sleep when I
am sleepy.'

'You're lovely,' the Colonel told her.  'And you sleep better than
anyone ever slept.'

'I am not proud of it,' the girl said, very sleepily.  'It is just
something that I do.'

'Do it, please.'

'No.  Tell me very low and soft and put your bad hand in mine.'

'The hell with my bad hand,' the Colonel said.  'Since when was it so
bad?'

'It's bad,' the girl said.  'Badder, or worse, than you will ever know.
Please tell me about combat without being too brutal.'

'An easy assignment,' the Colonel said.  'I'll skip the times.  The
weather is cloudy and the place is 986342.  What's the situation?  We
are smoking the enemy with artillery and mortar.  S-3 advises that S-6
wants Red to button up by 1700.  S-6 wants you to button up and use
plenty of artillery.  White reports that they are in fair shape.  S-6
informs that A company will swing around and tie in with B.

'B Company was stopped first by enemy action and stayed there of their
own accord.  S-6 isn't doing so good.  This is unofficial.  He wants
more artillery but there isn't any more artillery.

'You wanted combat for what?  I don't know really why.  Or really know
why.  Who wants true combat?  But here it is, Daughter, on the
telephone and later I will put in the sounds and smells and anecdotes
about who was killed when and where if you want them.'

'I only want what you will tell me.'

'I'll tell you how it was,' the Colonel said, 'and General Walter
Bedell Smith doesn't know how it was yet.  Though, probably, I am
wrong, as I have been so many times.'

'I'm glad we don't have to know him or the nylon-smooth man,' the girl
said.

'We won't have to know them this side of hell,' the Colonel assured
her.  'And I will have a detail guarding the gates of hell so that no
such characters enter.'

'You sound like Dante,' she said sleepily.

'I am Mister Dante,' he said.  'For the moment.'

And for a while he was and he drew all the circles.  They were as
unjust as Dante's but he drew them.




Chapter XXXIII

'I will skip the detailed part since you are, justifiably, and should
be, sleepy,' the Colonel said.  He watched, again, the strange play of
the light on the ceiling.  Then he looked at the girl, who was more
beautiful than any girl that he had ever seen, ever.

He had seen them come and go, and they go faster, when they go, than
any other thing that flies.  They can go faster from fair beauty to the
knocker's shop than any other animal, he thought.  But I believe that
this one could hold the pace and stay the course.  The dark ones last
the best, he thought, and looked at the bony structure in that face.
This one has a fine blood line too, and she can go for ever.  Most of
our own lovely beauties come from soda counters, and they do not know
their grandfather's last name, unless, maybe, it was Schultz.  Or
Schlitz, he thought.

This is the wrong attitude to take, he said to himself; since he did
not wish to express any of these sentiments to the girl, who would not
like them anyway, and was soundly sleepy now the way a cat is when it
sleeps within itself.

'Sleep well, my dearest lovely, and I will just tell it for nothing.'

The girl was asleep, still holding his bad hand, that he despised, and
he could feel her breathe, as the young breathe when they are easily
asleep.

The Colonel told her all about it; but he did not utter it.

So after I had the privilege of hearing General Walter Bedell Smith
explain the facility of the attack, we made it.  There was the Big Red
One, who believed their own publicity.  There was the Ninth, which was
a better Division than we were.  There was us, who had always done it
when they asked for you to do it.

We had no time to read comic books, and we had no time for practically
nothing, because we always moved before first light.  This is difficult
and you have to throw away the Big Picture and be a division.

We wore a four-leaf clover, which meant nothing except among ourselves,
who all loved it.  And every time I ever see it the same thing happens
in my inner guts.  Some people thought that it was ivy.  But it was
not.  It was a four-leaf clover disguised as ivy.

The orders were that we would attack with the Big Red One, the First
Infantry Division of the Army of the United States, and they, and their
Calypso singing PRO never let you forget it.  He was a nice guy.  And
it was his job.

But you get fed up with horse-dung unless you like the aroma or the
taste.  I never liked it.  Although I loved to walk through cow-dung
when I was a kid and feel it between my toes.  But horse-dung bores
you.  It bores me very rapidly, and I can detect it at over one
thousand yards.

So we attacked, the three of us in line, exactly where the Germans
wished us to attack.  We will not mention General Walter Bedell Smith
any further.  He is not the villain.  He only made the promises and
explained how it would go.  There are no villains, I presume, in a
Democracy.  He was only just as wrong as hell.  Period, he added in his
mind.

The patches had all been removed even as far back as the rear echelon
so that no Kraut would know that it was us, the three he knew so well,
who were going to attack.  We were going to attack with the three of us
in line and nothing in reserve.  I won't try to explain what that
means, Daughter.  But it isn't any good.  And the place we were going
to fight in, which I had taken a good look at, was going to be
Passchendaele with tree bursts.  I say that too much.  But I think it
too much.

The poor bloody twenty-eighth which was up on our right had been bogged
down for some time and so there was pretty accurate information
available about what conditions in those woods were going to be like.
I think we could conservatively describe them as unfavourable.

Then we were ordered to commit one regiment before the attack started.
That means that the enemy will get at least one prisoner which makes
all the taking off of the Divisional patches silly.  They would be
waiting for the old four-leaf clover people who would go straight to
hell like a mule and do it for one hundred and five days.  Figures of
course mean nothing to civilians.  Nor to the characters from SHAEF we
never saw in those woods.  Incidentally, and of course these
occurrences are always incidental at the SHAEF level, the regiment was
destroyed.  It was no one's bloody fault, especially not the fault of
the man who commanded it.  He was a man I would be glad to spend half
my time in hell with; and may yet.

It certainly would be odd if instead of going to hell, as we always
counted on, we should go to one of those Kraut joints like Valhalla and
not be able to get along with the people.  But maybe we could get a
corner table with Rommel and Udet and it would be just like any
winter-sports hotel.  It will probably be hell though and I don't even
believe in hell.

Well anyway this regiment was rebuilt as American regiments always are
by the replacement system.  I won't describe it since you can always
read about it in a book by somebody who was a replacement.  It boils
down, or distils, to the fact you stay in until you are hit badly or
killed or go crazy and get section-eighted.  But I guess it is logical
and as good as any other, given the difficulties of transport.  However
it leaves a core of certain un-killed characters who know what the
score is and no one of these characters liked the look of these woods
much.

You could sum up their attitude In this phrase, 'Don't ---- me, Jack.'

And since I had been an un-killed character for around twenty-eight
years I could understand their attitude.  But they were soldiers, so
most of them got killed in those woods and when we took the three towns
that looked so innocent and were really fortresses.  They were just
built to tempt us and we had no word on them at all.  To continue to
use the silly parlance of my trade: this could or could not be faulty
intelligence.

'I feel terribly about the regiment,' the girl said.  She had wakened
and spoken straight from sleep.

'Yes,' said the Colonel.  'So do I.  Let's drink to it once.  Then you
go to sleep, Daughter, please.  The war is over and forgotten.'

Please don't think that I am conceited, Daughter, he said, without
speaking.  His true love was sleeping again.  She slept in a different
way than his career girl had slept.  He did not like to remember how
the career girl slept, yet he did.  But he wanted to forget it.  She
did not sleep pretty, he thought.  Not like this girl who slept as
though she were awake and alive; except she was asleep.  Please sleep
well, he thought.

Who the hell are you to criticize career girls?  he thought.  What
miserable career did you attempt and have failed at?

I wished to be, and was, a General Officer in the Army of the United
States.  I have failed and I speak badly of all who have succeeded.

Then his contrition did not last, and he said to himself, 'Except the
brown-nosers, the five and ten and twenty percenters and all the jerks
from wherever who never fought and hold commands.'

They killed several men from the Academy at Gettysburg.  That was the
big kill day of all kill days, when there was a certain amount of
opposition by both sides.

Don't be bitter.  They killed General McNair by mistake the day the
Valhalla Express came over.  Quit being bitter.  People from the
Academy were killed and there are statistics to prove it.

How can I remember if I am not bitter?

Be as bitter as you want.  And tell the girl, now silently, and that
will not hurt her, ever, because she is sleeping so lovely.  He said
lovely to himself since his thinking was often un-grammatical.




Chapter XXXIV

Sleep softly, my true love, and when you wake, this will be over and I
will joke you out of trying to learn details of the _triste metier_ of
war and we will go to buy the little negro, or moor, carved in ebony
with his fine features and his jewelled turban.  Then you will pin him
on and we will go to have a drink at Harry's and see whoever or
whatever of our friends that will be afoot at that hour.

We will lunch at Harry's, or we'll come back here and I will be packed.
We will say good-bye and I will get into the _motoscafo_ with Jackson
and make some cheerful crack to the _Gran Maestro_ and wave to any
other members of the Order and ten to one, the way I feel right now, or
two will get you thirty, we will not ever see one another again.

Hell, he said to no one and certainly not aloud, I've felt this way
before many fights and almost always at some time in the fall of the
year and always when leaving Paris.  Probably it doesn't mean a thing.

Who gives a damn anyway except me and the _Gran Maestro_ and this girl;
I mean at command level.

I give very much of a damn myself.  But I certainly should be trained
and adjusted by this time not to give a much for nothing; like the
definition of a whore.  A woman who does not, etc.

But we won't think about that boy, lieutenant, captain, major, colonel,
general, sir.  We will just lay it on the line once more and the hell
with it and with its ugly face that old Hieronymus Bosch really
painted.  But you can sheathe your scythe, old brother death, if you
have got a sheath for it.  Or, he added, thinking of Hurtgen now, you
can take your scythe and stick it.

It was Passchendaele with tree bursts, he told nobody except the wonder
light on the ceiling.  Then he looked at the girl, to see that she was
sleeping well enough so even his thoughts would not hurt her.

Then he looked at the portrait and he thought, I have her in two
positions, lying down, turned a little on her side and looking at me
straight in front.  I'm a lucky son of a bitch and I should never be
sad about anything.




Chapter XXXV

The first day there, we lost the three battalion commanders.  One
killed in the first twenty minutes and the other two hit later.  This
is only a statistic to a journalist.  But good battalion commanders
have never yet grown on trees; not even Christmas trees which was the
basic tree of that woods.  I do not know how many times we lost company
commanders how many times over.  But I could look it up.

They aren't made, nor grown, as fast as a crop of potatoes is either.
We got a certain amount of replacements but I can remember thinking
that it would be simpler and more effective, to shoot them in the area
where they de-trucked, than to have to try to bring them back from
where they would be killed and bury them.  It takes men to bring them
back and gasoline and men to bury them.  These men might just as well
be fighting and get killed too.

There was snow, or something, rain or fog, all the times and the roads
had been mined as many as fourteen mines deep in certain stretches, so
when the vehicles churned down to a new string deeper, in another part
of the mud, you were always losing vehicles and, of course, the people
that went with them.

Besides just mortaring it all to hell and having all the fire-lanes
taped for machine-gun and automatic weapon fire, they had the whole
thing worked out and canalized so however you out-thought them you ran
right into it.  They also shelled you with heavy artillery fire and
with at least one railway gun.

It was a place where it was extremely difficult for a man to stay alive
even if all he did was be there.  And we were attacking all the time
and every day.

Let's not think about it.  The hell with it.  Maybe two things I will
think about and get rid of them.  One was a bare-assed piece of hill
that you had to cross to get into Grosshau.

Just before you had to make this run, which was under observation with
fires by 88s, there was a little piece of dead ground where they could
only hit you with a howitzer, only interdicting fires, or, from the
right by mortar.  When we cleaned it up we found they had good
observation for their mortars there too.

This was a comparatively safe place, I'm really not lying, not me nor
anybody eke.  You can't fool those that were in Hurtgen and if you lied
they would know it the minute you opened your mouth, Colonel or no
Colonel.

We met a truck at this place and slowed up, and he had the usual grey
face and he said, 'Sir, there is a dead G.I. in the middle of the road
up ahead and every time any vehicle goes through they have to run over
him and I'm afraid it is making a bad impression on the troops.'

'We'll get him off the road.'

So we got him off the road.

And I can remember just how he felt, lifting him, and how he had been
flattened and the strangeness of his flatness.

Then there was one other thing, I remember.  We had put an awful lot of
white phosphorus on the town before we got in for good, or whatever you
would call it.  That was the first time I ever saw a German dog eating
a roasted German Kraut.  Later on I saw a cat working on him too.  It
was a hungry cat, quite nice looking, basically.  You wouldn't think a
good German cat would eat a good German soldier, would you, Daughter?
Or a good German dog eat a good German soldier's ass which had been
roasted by white phosphorus.

How many could you tell like that?  Plenty, and what good would they
do?  You could tell a thousand and they would not prevent war.  People
would say we are not fighting the Krauts and besides the cat did not
eat me nor my brother Gordon, because he was in the Pacific.  Maybe
land crabs ate Gordon.  Or maybe he just deliquesced.

In Hurtgen they just froze up hard; and it was so cold they froze up
with ruddy faces.  Very strange.  They all were grey and yellow like
wax-works, in the summer.  But once the winter really came they had
ruddy faces.

Real soldiers never tell anyone what their own dead looked like, he
told the portrait.  And I'm through with this whole subject.  And what
about that company dead up the draw?  What about them, professional
soldier?

They're dead, he said.  And I can hang and rattle.

Now who would join me in a glass of Valpolicella?  What time do you
think I should wake your opposite number, you girl?  We have to get to
that jewellery place.  And I look forward to making jokes and to
talking of the most cheerful things.

What's cheerful, portrait?  You ought to know.  You're smarter than I
am, although you haven't been around as much.

All right, canvas girl, the Colonel told her, not saying it aloud,
we'll drop the whole thing and in eleven minutes I will wake the live
girl up and we will go out on the town and be cheerful and leave you
here to be wrapped.

I didn't mean to be rude.  I was just joking roughly.  I don't wish to
be rude ever because I will be living with you from now on.  I hope, he
added, and drank a glass of the wine.




Chapter XXXVI

It was a sharp, cold bright day and they stood outside the window of
the jeweller's shop and studied the two small negro heads and torsos
that were carved to ebony and adorned with studded jewels.  One was as
good as the other, the Colonel thought.

'Which do you like the best, Daughter?'

'I think the one on the right.  Don't you think he has the nicer face?'

'They both have nice faces.  But I think I would rather have him attend
you if it was the old days.'

'Good.  We'll take him.  Let's go in and see them.  I must ask the
price.'

'I will go in.'

'No, let me ask the price.  They will charge me less than they would
charge you.  After all you are a rich American.'

'_Et toi_, Rimbaud?'

'You'd make an awfully funny Verlalne,' the girl told him.  'We'll be
some other famous characters.'

'Go on to, Majesty, and we'll buy the God-damn jewel.'

'You wouldn't make a very good Louis XVI either.'

'I'd get up to that tumbril with you and still be able to spit.'

'Let's forget all the tumbrils and everyone's sorrows and buy the small
object and then we can walk to Cipriani's and be famous people.'

Inside the shop they looked at the two heads and she asked the price
and then, there was some very rapid talk and the price was much lower.
But still it was more money than the Colonel had.

'I'll go to Cipriani's and get some money.'

'No,' the girl said.  Then to the clerk, 'Put it in a box and send it
to Cipriani's and say the Colonel said to pay for it and hold it for
him.'

'Please,' the clerk said.  'Exactly as you say.'

They went out into the street and the sunlight and the unremitting wind.

'By the way,' the Colonel said.  'Your stones are in the safe at the
Gritti in your name.'

'Your stones.'

'No,' he told her, not rough, but to make her understand truly.  'There
are some things that a person cannot do.  You know about that.  You
cannot marry me and I understand that, although I do not approve it.'

'Very well,' the girl said.  'I understand.  But would you take one for
a lucky stone?'

'No.  I couldn't.  They are too valuable.'

'But the portrait has value.'

'That is different.'

'Yes,' she agreed.  'I suppose so.  I think I begin to understand.'

'I would accept a horse from you, if I was poor and young and riding
very well.  But I could not take a motor car.'

'I understand it now very well.  Where can we go now, at this minute,
where you can kiss me?'

'In this side alley, if you know no one who lives in it.'

'I don't care who lives in it.  I want to feel you hold me tight and
kiss me.'

They turned into the side street and walked towards its blind end.

'Oh, Richard,' she said.  'Oh, my dear.'

'I love you.'

'Please love me.'

'I do.'

The wind had blown her hair up and around his neck and he kissed her
once more with it beating silkily against both his cheeks.

Then she broke away, suddenly and hard, and looked at him and said, 'I
suppose we had better go to Harry's.'

'I suppose so.  Do you want to play historical personages?'

'Yes,' she said.  'Let us play that you are you and I am me.'

'Let's play,' the Colonel said.




Chapter XXXVII

There was no one in Harry's except some early morning drinkers that the
Colonel did not know and two men that were doing business at the back
of the bar.

There were hours at Harry's when it filled with the people that you
knew, with the same rushing regularity as the tide coming in at Mont
St. Michel.  Except, the Colonel thought, the hours of the tides change
each day with the moon and the hours at Harry's are as the Greenwich
Meridian, or the standard metre in Paris, or the good opinion the
French military hold of themselves.

'Do you know any of these morning drinkers?' he asked the girl.

'No.  I am not a morning drinker so I have never met them.'

'They will be swept out when the tide comes in.'

'No.  They will leave, just as it comes, of their own accord.'

'Do you mind being here out of season?'

'Did you think I was a snob because I come from an old family?  We're
the ones who are not snobs.  The snobs are what you call jerks and the
people with all the new money.  Did you ever see so much new money?'

'Yes,' the Colonel said.  'I saw it in Kansas City when I used to come
in from Fort Riley to play polo at the Country Club.'

'Was it as bad as here?'

'No, it was quite pleasant.  I liked it and that part of Kansas City is
very beautiful.'

'Is it really?  I wish that we could go there.  Do they have the camps
there too?  The ones that we are going to stay at?'

'Surely.  But we'll stay at the Muehlebach hotel which has the biggest
beds in the world and we'll pretend that we are oil millionaires.'

'Where will we leave the Cadillac?'

'Is it a Cadillac now?'

'Yes.  Unless you want to take the big Buick Roadmaster, with the
Dynaflow drive.  I've driven it all over Europe.  It was in that last
_Vogue_ you sent me.'

'We'd probably better just use one at a time,' the Colonel said.
'Whichever one we decide to use we will park in the garage alongside
the Muehlebach.'

'Is the Muehlebach very splendid?'

'Wonderful.  You'll love it.  When we leave town we'll drive north to
St. Joe and have a drink in the bar at the Roubidoux, maybe two drinks
and then we will cross the river and go west.  You can drive and we can
spell each other.'

'What is that?'

'Take turns driving.'

'I'm driving now.'

'Let's skip the dull part and get to Chimney Rock and go on to Scott's
Bluff and Torrington and after that you will begin to see it.'

'I have the road maps and the guides and that man who says where to eat
and the A.A.A. guide to the camps and the hotels.'

'Do you work on this much?'

'I work at it in the evenings, with the things you sent me.  What kind
of a licence will we have?'

'Missouri.  We'll buy the car in Kansas City.  We fly to Kansas City,
don't you remember?  Or we can go on a really good train.'

'I thought we flew to Albuquerque.'

'That was another time.'

'Will we stop early in the afternoons at the best Hotel in the A.A.A.
book and I make you any drinks you want while you read the paper and
_Life_ and _Time_ and _Newsweek_ and I will read the new fresh _Vogue_
and _Harper's Bazaar_?

'Yes.  But we come back here, too.'

'Of course.  With our car.  On an Italian liner; whichever one is best
then.  We drive straight here from Genoa.'

'You don't want to stop anywhere for the night?'

'Why?  We want to get home to our own house.'

'Where will our house be?'

'We can decide that any time.  There are always plenty of houses in
this town.  Would you like to live in the country too?'

'Yes,' said the Colonel.  'Why not?'

'Then we could see the trees when we woke up.  What sort of trees will
we see on this journey?'

'Pine mostly and cotton-wood along the creeks and aspen.  Wait till you
see the aspen turn yellow in the fall.'

'I'm waiting.  Where will we stay in Wyoming?'

'We'll go to Sheridan first and then decide.'

'Is Sheridan nice?'

'It's wonderful.  In the car we'll drive to where they had the
Wagon-Box Fight and I'll tell you about it.  We will drive up, on the
way to Billings, to where they killed that fool George Armstrong Custer
and you can see the markers where everybody died and I'll explain the
fight to you.'

'That will be wonderful.  Which is Sheridan more like; Mantova or
Verona or Vicenza?'

'It isn't like any of those.  It is right up against the mountains,
almost like Schio.'

'Is it like Cortina then?'

'Nothing like.  Cortina is in a high valley in the mountains.  Sheridan
lays right up against them.  There aren't any foothills to the Big
Horns.  They rise high out of the plateau.  You can see Cloud's Peak.'

'Will our cars climb them properly?'

'You're damn right they will.  But I would much rather not have any
hydromatic drive.'

'I can do without it,' the girl said.  Then she held herself straight
and hard not to cry.  'As I can do without everything else.'

'What are you drinking?' the Colonel said.  'We haven't even ordered
yet.'

'I don't think I will drink anything.'

'Two very dry Martinis,' the Colonel said to the bartender, 'and a
glass of cold water.'

He reached into his pocket and unscrewed the top of the medicine bottle
and shook two of the big tablets into his left hand.  With them in his
hand, he screwed the top back on the bottle.  It was no feat for a man
with a bad right hand.

'I said I didn't want to drink anything.'

'I know, Daughter.  But I thought you might need one.  We can leave it
on the bar.  Or I can drink it myself.  Please,' he said.  'I did not
mean to be brusque.'

'We haven't asked for the little negro that will look after me.'

'No.  Because I did not want to ask for him until Cipriani came in and
I could pay for him.'

'Is everything that rigid?'

'With me, I guess,' the Colonel said.  'I'm sorry, Daughter.'

'Say daughter three times straight.'

'_Hija, figlia_, Daughter.'

'I don't know,' she said.  'I think we should just leave here.  I love
to have people see us, but I don't want to see anybody.'

'The box with the negro in it is on top of the cash register.'

'I know.  I've seen it for some time.'

The bar-tender came, with the two drinks, frost cold from the chilled
coldness of the glasses and he brought the glass of water.

'Give me that small packet that came in my name and is on top of the
cash register,' the Colonel said to him.  'Tell Cipriani I will send
him a cheque for it.'

He had made another decision.

'Do you want your drink, Daughter?'

'Yes.  If you don't mind me changing my mind too.'

They drank, after touching glasses very lightly, so lightly that the
contact was almost imperceptible.

'You were right,' she said, feeling its warmth and its momentary
destruction of sorrow.

'You were right too,' he said, and palmed the two tablets.

He thought taking them with the water now, was in bad taste.  So, when
the girl turned her head a moment to watch a morning drinker go out to
the door, he swallowed them with the Martini.

'Should we go, Daughter?'

'Yes.  By all means.'

'Bar-tender,' the Colonel said.  'How much are these drinks?  And do
not forget to tell Cipriani I am sending him a cheque for this
nonsense.'




Chapter XXXVIII

They ate lunch at the Gritti and the girl had unwrapped the small ebony
negro's head and torso and pinned it high on her left shoulder.  It was
about three inches long and was quite lovely to look at if you liked
that sort of thing.  And if you don't you are stupid, the Colonel
thought.

But do not even think rough, he told himself.  You have to be good now
in every way until you say good-bye.  What a word, he thought, good-bye.

It sounds like a Valentine slogan.

Good-bye and _bonne chance_ and _hasta la vista_.  We always just said
_merde_ and let it go at that.  Farewell, he thought, that is a nice
word.  It sings well, he thought.  Farewell, a long farewell and take
it with you where you go.  With handles, he thought.

'Daughter,' he said.  'How long has it been since I told you that I
loved you?'

'Not since we sat at the table.'

'I tell you now.'

She had combed her hair with patience when they came into the hotel and
she had gone into the room for women.  She disliked such rooms.

She had used lipstick to make the sort of mouth she knew he most
desired and she had said to herself, making the mouth correctly, 'Don't
think at all.  Don't think.  Above all don't be sad because he is going
now.'

'You look beautiful.'

'Thank you.  I would like to be beautiful for you if I could and if I
could be beautiful.'

'Italian is a lovely language.'

'Yes.  Mister Dante thought so.'

'_Gran Maestro_,' the Colonel said.  'What is there to eat in this
_Wirtschaft_?'

The _Gran Maestro_ had been observing, without observing, with
affection and without envy.

'Do you want meat, or fish?'

'It's Saturday,' the Colonel said.  'Fish is not compulsory.  So I'll
take it.'

'It is sole,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'What do you want, my Lady?'

'Whatever you decide.  You know more about food than I do and I like it
all.'

'Make a decision, Daughter.'

'No.  I would rather leave it to someone who knows more than me.  I
have a boarding-school appetite.'

'It will come as a surprise,' the _Gran Maestro_ said with his long and
loving face with the grey eyebrows over the softly hooded eyes and the
ever happy face of the old soldier who is still alive and appreciates
it.

'Is there any news from the Order?' the Colonel asked.

'Only that our leader, Himself, is in trouble.  They have confiscated
everything he owns.  Or at any rate they have intervened.'

'I hope it is not serious.'

'We will have confidence in our leader.  He has ridden out worse
tempests than this.'

'To our leader,' the Colonel said.

He raised his glass, which had been filled with the decanted new and
true Valpolicella.  'Drink to him, Daughter.'

'I can't drink to that swine,' the girl said.  'Besides I do not belong
to the Order.'

'You are a member now,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  '_Por merito di
guerra_.'

'I'll drink to him then,' she said.  'Am I really a member of the
Order?'

'Yes,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.  'You have not received your parchment
yet but I appoint you Super Honorary Secretary.  My Colonel will reveal
to you the secrets of the Order.  Reveal, please, my Colonel.'

'I reveal', the Colonel said.  'There are no pitted folk about?'

'No.  He is out with his Lady.  Miss Baedeker.'

'O.K.  then,' the Colonel said.  'I will reveal.  There is only the
major secret that you must know.  Correct me, _Gran Maestro_, if I fall
into error.'

'Proceed to reveal,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.

'I proceed to reveal,' the Colonel said.  'Listen carefully, Daughter.
This is the Supreme Secret.  Listen.  'Love is love and fun is fun.
But it is always so quiet when the gold fish die.'

'It has been revealed,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.

'I am very proud and happy to be a member of the Order,' the girl said.
'But it is, in a way, a rather rough Order.'

'It is indeed,' the Colonel said.  'And now, _Gran Maestro_, what do we
actually eat; without mysteries?'

'Some crab _enchillada_, in the style of this town, but cold, first.
Served in the shell.  Then sole for you and for my lady a mixed grill.
What vegetables?'

'Whatever you have,' the Colonel said.

The _Gran Maestro_ was gone and the Colonel looked at the girl and then
at the Grand Canal outside the window and he saw the magic spots and
changes of light that were even here, in the end of the bar, which had
now by skilful handling been made into a dining-room, and he said, 'Did
I tell you, Daughter, that I love you?'

'You haven't told me for quite a long time.  But I love you.'

'What happens to people that love each other?'

'I suppose they have whatever they have and they are more fortunate
than others.  Then one of them gets the emptiness for ever.'

'I won't be rough,' the Colonel said.  'I could have made a rough
response.  But please don't have any emptiness.'

'I'll try,' the girl said.  'I've been trying ever since I woke up.
I've tried ever since we knew each other.'

'Keep on trying, Daughter,' the Colonel said.

Then to the Grand Maestro, who had reappeared, having given his orders,
the Colonel said, 'A bottle of that _vino secco_, from Vesuvius, for
the small soles.  We have the Valpolicella for the other things.'

'Can't I drink the Vesuvius wine with my mixed grill?' the girl asked.

'Renata, Daughter,' the Colonel said.  'Of course.  You can do
anything.'

'I like to drink the same wines as you if I drink wine.'

'Good white wine is good with a mixed grill, at your age,' the Colonel
told her.

'I wish there was not such a difference in ages.'

'I like it very much,' the Colonel said.  'Except,' he added.  Then he
did not continue and said, 'Let's be _fraîche et rose comme au jour de
bataille_.'

'Who said that?'

'I haven't the slightest idea.  I picked it up when I took a course at
the _Collège des Maréchaux_.  A rather pretentious title.  But I
graduated.  What I know best I learned from the Krauts, studying them
and opposing them.  They are the best soldiers.  But they always
over-reach.'

'Let's be like you said and please tell me that you love me.'

'I love you,' he said.  'That's what you can base on.  I tell you
truly.'

'It is Saturday,' she said.  'And when is next Saturday?'

'Next Saturday is a movable feast, Daughter.  Find me a man who can
tell me about next Saturday.'

'You could tell me if you would.'

'I'll ask the _Gran Maestro_, maybe he knows.  _Gran Maestro_, when
will next Saturday come?'

'_A Pâques ou à la Trinité_,' the _Gran Maestro_ said.

'Why don't we have any smells from the kitchen to cheer us up?'

'Because the wind is from the wrong direction.'

Yes, the Colonel thought.  The wind is from the wrong direction and how
lucky I would have been to have had this girl instead of the woman that
I pay alimony to, who could not even make a child.  She hired out for
that.  But who should criticize whose tubes?  I only criticize Goodrich
or Firestone or General.

Keep it clean, he said to himself.  And love your girl.

She was there beside him, wishing to be loved, if he had any love to
give.

It came back, as it always had, when he saw her and he said, 'How are
you with the crow wing hair and the break-heart face?'

'I'm fine.'

'_Gran Maestro_,' the Colonel said.  'Produce a few smells or something
from your off-stage kitchen, even if the wind is against us.'




Chapter XXXIX

The hall porter had telephoned, under the direction of the concierge,
and it was the same motor boat that they had ridden in before.

T5 Jackson was in the boat with the luggage and the portrait, which had
been well and sturdily wrapped.  It was still blowing hard.

The Colonel had paid his bill and made the proper tips.  The people of
the hotel had put the luggage and the picture in the boat and seen that
Jackson was seated properly.  Then they had retired.

'Well, Daughter,' the Colonel said.

'Can't I ride with you to the garage?'

'It would be just as bad at the garage.'

'Please let me ride to the garage.'

'All right,' the Colonel said.  'It's your show, really.  Get in.'

They did not talk at all and the wind was a stern wind so that, with
what speed the old calamity of a motor made, there seemed almost to be
no wind at all.

At the landing place, where Jackson was handing the luggage to a porter
and looking after the portrait himself, the Colonel said, 'Do you want
to say good-bye here?'

'Do I have to?'

'No.'

'May I come up to the bar in the garage while they are getting the car
down?'

'That will be worse.'

'I do not care.'

'Get that stuff up to the garage and have somebody look after it until
you get the car down,' the Colonel said to Jackson.  'Check on my guns
and pack this stuff in a way to give the maximum space in the rear
seat.'

'Yes, sir,' Jackson said.

'Am I going then?' the girl asked.

'No,' the Colonel told her.

'Why can't I go?'

'You know very well.  You weren't invited.'

'Please don't be bad.'

'Christ, Daughter, if you knew how hard I am trying not to be.  It's
easy if you're bad.  Let's pay this good man off and go over and sit on
the bench there under the tree.'

He paid the owner of the motor boat and told him that he had not
forgotten about the jeep engine.  He also told him not to count on it,
but that there was a good chance that he could get it.

'It will be a used engine.  But it will be better than that coffee pot
you have in there now.'

They went up the worn stone steps and walked across the gravel and sat
on a bench under the trees.

The trees were black and moved in the wind and there were no leaves on
them.  The leaves had fallen early that year and been swept up long ago.

A man came over to offer postcards for sale and the Colonel told him,
'Run along, son.  We don't need you now.'

The girl was crying, finally, although she had made the decision never
to cry.

'Look, Daughter,' the Colonel said.  'There isn't anything to say.
They didn't instal shock-absorbers in this vehicle we ride in now.'

'I've stopped,' she said.  'I'm not an hysterical.'

'I wouldn't say you were.  I'd say you were the loveliest and most
beautiful girl that ever lived.  Any time.  Any place.  Anywhere.'

'If it were true, what difference would it make?'

'You have me there,' the Colonel said.  'But it is true.'

'So now what?'

'So now we stand up and kiss each other and say good-bye.'

'What's that?'

'I don't know,' the Colonel said.  'I guess that is one of the things
everybody has to figure out for themselves.'

'I'll try to figure it.'

'Just take it as easy as you can, Daughter.'

'Yes,' the girl said.  'In the vehicle without the shock-absorbers.'

'You were tumbril bait from the start.'

'Can't you do anything kindly?'

'I guess not.  But I've tried.'

'Please keep on trying.  That's all the hope we have.'

'I'll keep on trying.'

So they held each other close and kissed each other hard and true and
the Colonel took the girl across the stretch of gravel and down the
stone steps.

'You ought to take a good one.  Not that old displaced engine boat.'

'I'd rather take the displaced engine boat if you don't mind.'

'Mind?' the Colonel said.  'Not me.  I only give orders and obey
orders.  I don't mind.  Good-bye, my dear, lovely, beautiful.'

'Good-bye,' she said.




Chapter XL

He was in the sunken oak hogshead that they used in the Veneto for
blinds.  A blind is any artifice you use to hide the shooter from that
which he is attempting to shoot, which, in this case, were ducks.

It had been a good trip out with the boys, once they had met in the
garage and a good evening with excellent food cooked on the old
open-hearth kitchen.  Three shooters rode in the rear seat, on the way
to the shooting place.  Those who did not lie had permitted themselves
a certain amount of exaggeration and the liars had never been in fuller
flower.

A liar, in full flower, the Colonel had thought, is as beautiful as
cherry trees, or apple trees when they are in blossom.  Who should ever
discourage a liar, he thought, unless he is giving you co-ordinates?

The Colonel had collected liars all his life, as some men gather
postage stamps.  He did not classify them, except at the moment, nor
treasure them truly.  He just enjoyed, completely, hearing them lie at
the moment, unless, of course, something concerned with duty was
involved.  Last night there had been a fair amount of good lying after
the grappa had been passed around and the Colonel had enjoyed it.

There had been smoke in the room from the open charcoal fire; no, there
were logs, he thought.  Anyway a liar lies best when there is a little
smoke or when the sun has set.

He had come close to lying twice himself and had held it up and merely
exaggerated.  I hope anyway, he thought.

Now here was the frozen lagoon to ruin everything.  But it was not
ruined.

A pair of pin-tails came, suddenly, from nowhere, slanting down fast in
a dive no aeroplane ever made, and the Colonel heard their feathered
trajectory and swung and killed the drake.  He lay on the ice, hitting
it as solid as a duck can hit ice and, before he was down, the Colonel
had killed his mate, who was climbing, long-necked and fast.

She fell alongside the drake.

So it is murder, the Colonel thought.  And what isn't nowadays?  But,
boy, you can still shoot.

Boy, hell, he thought.  You beat-up old bastard.  But look at them come
now.

They were widgeon and they came in a whisp that coagulated and then
stretched to nothing.  Then they coagulated again and the treacherous
duck on the ice started to talk to them.

Let them turn once more, the Colonel said to himself.  Keep your head
down and do not move even your eyes.  They are going to come in.

They came in well, with treachery speaking to them.

Their wings were suddenly set to alight, as when you lower the flaps.
Then they saw it was ice and they rose, climbing.

The shooter, who was not a Colonel now, nor anything but a gun handler,
rose in the wooden barrel and got two.  They hit the ice almost as
solidly as the big ducks.

Two is enough from one family, the Colonel said.  Or was it one tribe?

The Colonel heard a shot behind him, where he knew there was no other
blind and turned his head to look across the frozen lagoon to the far,
sedge-lined shore.

That does it, he thought.

A bunch of mallards, that had been coming in low, were flaring up into
the sky, seeming to stand on their tails as they climbed.

He saw one fall, then heard another shot.

It was the sullen boatman shooting at the ducks that would have come to
the Colonel.

How, how can he do that? The Colonel thought.

The man had a shot-gun to shoot any cripples that might be escaping
where the dog could not get them.  For him to fire at ducks that were
coming to the Colonel's blind was, in shooting, as bad a thing as one
man could do to another.

The boatman was too far away to hear a shout.  So the Colonel fired at
him twice.

It is too far for the pellets to reach, he thought, but at least he
will know that I know what he is doing.  What the hell is this all
about?  On a beautifully run shoot like this one too?  This is the best
organized and best run duck shoot I have ever shot at and I have had as
much fun shooting here as I ever had in my life.  What is the matter
with that son of a bitch?

He knew how bad his anger was for him.  So he took two of the pills and
washed them down with a drink of Gordon's gin from his flask since
there was no water.

He knew the gin was bad for him too and he thought, everything is bad
for me except rest and very light exercise.  O.K., rest and light
exercise, boy.  Do you suppose that is light exercise?

You, beauty, he said to himself.  I wish you were here now and we were
in the double blind and if we could only just feel the backs of our
shoulders touch.  I'd look around and see you and I would shoot the
high ducks well, to show off and try to put one in the blind without
having it hit you.  I'd try to pull one down like this, he said,
hearing the wings in the air.  He rose, turned, saw the single drake,
long-necked and beautiful, the wings fast moving and travelling to the
sea.  He saw him sharp and clear and in the sky with the mountains
behind him.  He met him, covered him and pulled as he swung as far back
as he could swing the gun.

The drake came down on the ice, just outside the perimeter of the blind
and broke the ice as he fell.  It was the ice that had been broken to
put out the decoys and it had re-frozen lightly.  The calling hen
looked at him as he lay and shifted her feet.

'You never saw him before in your life,' the Colonel said to the hen.
'I don't believe you even saw him coming.  Though you may have.  But
you didn't say anything.'

The drake had hit with his head down and his head was under the ice.
But the Colonel could see the beautiful winter plumage on his breast
and wings.

I'd like to give her a vest made of the whole plumage the way the old
Mexicans used to ornament their gods, he thought.  But I suppose these
ducks have to go to the market and no one would know how to skin and
cure the skins anyway.  It could be beautiful, though, with mallard
drake skins for the back and sprig for the front with two longitudinal
stripes of teal.  One coming down over each breast.  Be a hell of a
vest.  I'm pretty sure she'd like it.

I wish they would fly, the Colonel thought.  A few fool ducks might
come in.  I have to stay ready for them if they do.  But none came in
and he had to think.

There were no shots from the other blinds and only occasional shots
from the sea.

With the good light, the birds could see the ice and they no longer
came in and instead went out to the open sea to raft up.  So he had no
shooting and he thought without intention, trying to find what had made
it at the first.  He knew he did not deserve it and he accepted it and
he lived by it, but he sought, always, to understand it.

One time it had been two sailors when he had been walking with the girl
at night.  They had whistled at her and, the Colonel thought, that was
a harmless enough thing and he should have let it go.

But there was something wrong with it.  He sensed it before he knew it.
Then he knew it solidly, because he had stopped under a light, in order
that they might see what he wore on his shoulders, so that they might
take the other side of the street.

What he wore on each shoulder was a small eagle with wings
outstretched.  It was embroidered on to the coat he wore in silver
thread.  It was not conspicuous and it had been there a long time.  But
it was visible.

The two sailors whistled again.

'Stay over there against the wall if you want to watch it,' the Colonel
had said to the girl.  'Or look away.'

'They are very big and young.'

'They won't be big for long,' the Colonel promised her.

The Colonel walked over to the whistlers.

'Where is your shore patrol?' he asked.

'How would I know?' the biggest whistler said.  'All I want is a good
look at the dame.'

'Do people like you have names and serial numbers?'

'How would I know?' said one.

The other said, 'I wouldn't tell a chicken Colonel if I had.'

Old army boy, the Colonel thought, before he hit him.  Sea lawyer.
Knows all his rights.

But he hit him with a left from nowhere and hit him three times as he
started to go.

The other one, the first whistler, had closed fast and well, for a man
who had been drinking, and the Colonel gave him the elbow in the mouth
and then, under the light, had a good right hand shot at him.  When it
was in, he glanced at the second whistler and saw that was okay.

Then he threw a left hook.  Then he put the right way into the body,
coming up.  He threw another left hook and then turned away and walked
towards the girl because he did not want to hear the head hit the
pavement.

He checked on the one that had it first and noted he slept peacefully,
chin down, with the blood coming out of his mouth.  But it was still
the right colour, the Colonel noted.

'Well, there goes my career,' he said to the girl.  'Whatever that was.
But those people certainly wear funny pants.'

'How are you?' the girl asked.

'I'm fine.  Did you watch it?'

'Yes.'

'I'll have bad hands in the morning,' he said absent mindedly.  'But I
think we can walk away from it all right.  But let's walk slowly.'

'Please walk slowly.'

'I did not mean it that way.  I mean let's not be hurried in our
departure.'

'We will walk as slowly as two people can walk.'

So they walked.

'Do you want to try an experiment?'

'Of course.'

'Let's walk so we make even the backs of our legs look dangerous.'

'I'll try.  But I don't think I can.'

'Well, let's just walk then.'

'But didn't they hit you?'

'One pretty good right behind the ear.  The second boy when he came in.'

'Is that what fighting's like?'

'When you're lucky.'

'And when you're not lucky?'

'Your knees bend too.  Either forward or backward.'

'Do you still care for me after you have fought?'

'I love you much more than before if it were possible.'

'Can't it be possible?  It would be nice.  I love you more since I saw
that thing.  Am I walking slowly enough?'

'You walk like a deer in the forest and sometimes you walk as well as a
wolf, or an old, big coyote when he is not hurried.'

'I'm not sure I wish to be an old big coyote.'

'Wait till you see one,' the Colonel said.  'You'll wish.  You walk
like all the great predators, when they walk softly.  And you are not a
predator.'

'That I can promise.'

'Walk a little ahead so I can see.'

She walked ahead and the Colonel said, 'You walk like a champion before
he is the champion.  If you were a horse I would buy you if I had to
borrow the money at twenty per cent a month.'

'You don't have to buy me.'

'I know about that.  That was not what we were discussing.  We were
discussing your gait.'

'Tell me,' she said.  'What happens to those men?  That's one of the
things I don't know about fighting.  Shouldn't I have stayed and cared
for them?'

'Never,' the Colonel told her.  'Remember that; never.  I hope they
split a good concussion between them.  They can rot.  They caused the
accident.  There is no question of civil responsibility.  We were all
insured.  If I can tell you one thing, Renata, about fighting.'

'Tell me, please.'

'If you ever fight, then you must win it.  That's all that counts.  All
the rest is cabbage, as my old friend Dr. Rommel put it.'

'Did you really like Rommel?'

'Very much.'

'But he was your enemy.'

'I love my enemies, sometimes, more than my friends.  And the Navy, you
know, wins all their fights always.  This I learned in a place called
the Pentagon building when I was still permitted to enter that building
by the front door.  If you like we can stroll back down this street, or
walk it fast and ask those two that question.'

'I tell you truly, Richard.  I have seen enough fighting for one night.'

'Me too, to tell the truth,' the Colonel said.  But he said it in
Italian and it started, '_Anche io_.  Let's go to Harry's for one, and
then I will walk you home.'

'Didn't you hurt your bad hand?'

'No,' he explained.  'I only threw it once to the head.  The other
times I punched to the body with it.'

'May I feel it?'

'If you will feel very softly.'

'But it is terribly swollen.'

'There is nothing broken in it and that sort of swelling always goes
down.'

'Do you love me?'

'Yes.  I love you with two moderately swollen hands and all my heart.'




Chapter XLI

So that was that and maybe it was that day or maybe it was another that
made the miracle.  You never knew, he thought.  There was the great
miracle and he had never consciously implemented it.  Nor, he thought,
you son of a bitch, did you ever oppose it.

It was colder than ever and the broken ice re-froze and the calling
duck did not even look up now.  She had abandoned treachery for an
attempt at security.

You bitch, the Colonel thought.  Though that is unjust.  It is your
trade.  But why is it a hen calls better than a drake.  You ought to
know, he thought.  And even that's not true.  What the hell is true?
Drakes actually call better.

Now don't think of her.  Don't think of Renata because it won't do you
any good, boy.  It might even be bad for you.  Also you said good-bye.
What a good-bye that was.  Complete with tumbrils.  And she would have
climbed up in the damned tumbril with you too.  Just so long as it was
a real tumbril.  Very rough trade, he thought.  Loving and leaving.
People can get hurt at it.

Who gave you a right to know a girl like that?

Nobody, he answered.  But Andrea introduced me to her.

But how could she love a sad son of a bitch like you?

I do not know, he thought truly.  I truly do not know.

He did not know, among other things, that the girl loved him because he
had never been sad one waking morning of his life; attack or no attack.
He had experienced anguish and sorrow.  But he had never been sad in
the morning.

They make almost none like that and the girl, although she was a young
girl, knew one when she saw one.

Now she is at home and sleeping, the Colonel thought.  That is where
she ought to be and not in any god-damn duck blind with the decoys
frozen up on us.

I wish to hell she was here though, if this were a double blind and
have her looking to the west just in case one string did come in.  It
would be nice if she were warm enough.  Maybe I can trade somebody out
of one of these real down jackets that nobody ever sold that had one.
The kind they issued to the Air Force once by mistake.

I could find out how they are quilted and make one with duck down from
here, he thought.  I'd get a good tailor to cut it and we would make it
double-breasted with no pocket on the right and lay in a chamois
shooting patch so the gun butt would never catch.

I'll do it, he said to himself.  I'll do it, or I will get one off some
joker and have it cut down for her.  I'd like to get her a good Purdey
12, not too damn light, or a pair of Boss over and unders.  She should
have guns as good as she is.  I suppose a pair of Purdey's, he thought.

Just then he heard the light swish of pinions, fast beating in the air,
and looked up.  But they were too high.  He only looked up with his
eyes.  But they were so high they could see the barrel with him in it
and the frozen-in decoys with the dejected hen, who saw them too and
quacked hard in her loyal treachery.  The ducks, they were pin-tails,
continued on their flight out towards the sea.


I never gave her anything, as she pointed out.  There was the small
moor's head.  But it does not mean anything.  She selected it and I
bought it.  That is no way to give a gift.

What I would like to give her is security, which does not exist any
more; all my love, which is worthless; all my worldly goods, which are
practically non-existent except for two good shot-guns, my soldier
suits, the medals and decorations with the citations and some books.
Also a retired Colonel's pay.

With all my worldly goods I thee endow, he thought.

And she gave me her love, some hard stones, which I returned, and the
picture.  Well, I can always give her back the picture.  I could give
her my ring from V.M.I., he thought, but where the hell did I lose that?

She wouldn't want a D.S.C. with cluster, nor two silver stars, nor the
other junk, nor the medals of her own country.  Nor those of France.
Nor those of Belgium.  Nor the trick ones.  That would be morbid.

I better just give her my love.  But how the hell do you send it?  And
how do you keep it fresh?  They can't pack it in dry ice.

Maybe they can.  I must inquire.  But how do I get that condemned jeep
engine to that old man?

Figure it out, he thought.  Figuring things out has been your trade.
Figuring things out when they were shooting at you, he added.

I wish that son of a bitch that is lousing up the duck shooting had a
rifle and I had a rifle.  We would find out pretty soon who could
figure things out.  Even in a lousy barrel in a marsh where you can't
manoeuvre.  He'd have to come to get me.

Stop that, he said to himself, and think about your girl.  You do not
want to kill anyone any more; ever.

Who are you feeding that to, he told himself.  You going to run as a
Christian?  You might give it an honest try.  She would like you better
that way.  Or would she?  I don't know, he said frankly.  I honest to
God don't know.

Maybe I will get Christian towards the end.  Yes, he said, maybe you
will.  Who wants to make a bet on that?

'You want to bet on that?' he asked the calling duck.  But she was
looking up at the sky behind him and had commenced her small chuckling
talk.

They came over too high and never circled.  They only looked down and
went on towards the open sea.

They must really be rafted up out there, the Colonel thought.  There's
probably some punt gunner trying to sneak up on them now.  They will be
pretty close into the lee with the wind and someone is sneaking on to
them now surely.  Well, when he makes his shot some may break back this
way.  But with it frozen-up I suppose I really ought to pull out
instead of staying here like a fool.

I have killed enough and I have shot as well or better than I can
shoot.  Better hell, he thought.  Nobody shoots better than you here
except Alvarito and he's a kid and shoots faster.  But you kill fewer
ducks than many bad and fair shots.

Yes, I know about that.  I know about that and why and we don't go by
the numbers any more and we threw away the book too, remember?

He remembered how, by some miracle of chance in a war, he had been with
his best friend for a moment in action in the Ardennes and they were
pursuing.

It was early fall and it was on a high upland with sandy roads and
trails and the trees were scrub oak and pines.  The enemy tank and half
track prints showed clearly in the moist sand.

It had rained the day before, but now it was clearing and visibility
was good and you could see well across all the high, rolling country
and he and his friend were glassing it as carefully as though they were
hunting game.

The Colonel, who was a General then and an assistant divisional
commander, knew the individual print of each tracked vehicle they were
pursuing.  He also knew when the enemy vehicles had run out of mines
and approximately the number of rounds that remained to them.  He also
had figured where they had to fight before they reached the Siegfried.
He was sure they would not fight at either of these two places but
would race for where they were going.

'We're pretty far up for people of our exalted rank, George,' he said
to his best friend.

'Ahead of the point, General.'

'It's okay,' the Colonel had said.  'Now we throw away the book and
chase for keeps.'

'I couldn't agree more fully, General.  Because I wrote the book
myself,' his best friend said.  'But suppose they had left something
there?'

He pointed to the logical place to defend.

'They didn't leave anything there,' the Colonel had said.  'They
haven't enough stuff left even for a fire-fight.'

'Everybody's right until he's wrong,' his best friend said, adding,
'General.'

'I'm right,' the Colonel said.  He was right, too, although in
obtaining his exact knowledge he had not fulfilled the complete spirit
of the Geneva Convention which was alleged to govern the operation of
war.

'Let's really chase,' his best friend had said.

'There's nothing holding us up and I guarantee they won't stop at
either of those two.  I didn't get that from any Kraut either.  That's
from my head.'

He looked over the country once more, and heard the wind in the trees
and smelled the heather under their boots and looked once more at the
tracks in the wet sand and that was the end of that story.

I wonder if she'd like that? he thought.  No.  It builds me up too
much.  I'd like to get somebody else to tell it to her though and build
me solid.  George can't tell it to her.  He's the only one that could
tell it to her and he can't.  He sure as hell can't.

I've been right over ninety-five per cent of the time and that's a hell
of a batting average even in something as simple as war.  But that five
per cent when you are wrong can certainly be something.

I'll never tell you about that, Daughter.  That's just a noise heard
off stage in my heart.  My lousy chicken heart.  That bastard heart
certainly couldn't hold the pace.

Maybe he will, he thought, and took two of the tablets and a swallow of
gin and looked across the grey ice.

I'm going to get that sullen character in now and pick up and get the
hell to the farm house or the lodge, I suppose that I should call it.
The shooting's over.




Chapter XLII

The colonel had signalled the boatman in by standing up, in the sunken
barrel, firing two shots towards the empty sky, and then waving him
towards the blind.

The boat came in slowly, breaking ice all the way, and the man picked
up the wooden decoys, caught the calling hen and put her in her sack,
and, with the dog slithering on the ice, picked up the ducks.  The
boatman's anger seemed to be gone and to be replaced by a solid
satisfaction.

'You shot very few,' he said to the Colonel.

'With your help.'

That was all they said and the boatman placed the ducks carefully,
breasts up, on the bow of the boat, and the Colonel handed his guns and
the combination cartridge box and shooting stool into the boat.

The Colonel got into the boat and the boatman checked the blind and
unhooked the pocketed, apron-like device which had hung on the inside
of the blind to hold shells.  Then he got into the boat too and they
commenced their slow and laborious progress out through the ice to the
open water of the brown canal.  The Colonel worked as hard with the
poling oar as he had worked coming in.  But now, in the bright
sunlight, with the snow mountains to the north, and the line of the
sedge that marked the canal ahead of them, they worked together in
complete co-ordination.

Then they were into the canal, slipping breakingly in from the last
ice; then, suddenly, light-borne and the Colonel handed the big oar to
the boatman and sat down.  He was sweating.

The dog, who had been shivering at the Colonel's feet, pawed his way
over the gunwale of the boat and swam to the canal bank.  Shaking the
water from his white bedraggled coat, he was into the brown sedge and
brush, and the Colonel watched his progress towards home by the
movement of the brush.  He had never received his sausage.

The Colonel, feeling himself sweating, although he knew he was
protected from the wind by his field jacket, took two tablets from the
bottle and a sip of gin from his flask.

The flask was flat and of silver with a leather cover.  Under the
leather cover, which was worn and stained, it was engraved, on one
side, to Richard From Renata With Love.  No one had ever seen this
inscription except the girl, the Colonel and the man who had engraved
it.  It had not been engraved in the same place it was purchased.  That
was in the earliest days, the Colonel thought.  Now who cared?

On the screw-on top of the flask was engraved From R. to R.C.

The Colonel offered the flask to the boatman who looked at him, at the
flask, and said, 'What is it?'

'English grappa.'

'I'll try it.'

He took a long drink of it; the type of drink peasants take from a
flask.

'Thank you.'

'Did you have good shooting?'

'I killed four ducks.  The dog found three cripples shot by other
people.'

'Why did you shoot?'

'I'm sorry that I shot.  I shot in anger.'

I have done that myself sometimes, the Colonel thought, and did not ask
him what the anger was about.

'I am sorry they did not fly better.'

'That's the way things go,' the Colonel said.

The Colonel was watching the movement the dog made in the high grass
and sedge.  Suddenly he saw him stop; he was quite still.  Then he
pounced.  It was a high leap and a dive forward and down.

'He has a crippled,' he said to the boatman.

'Bobby,' the boatman called.  'Bring.  Bring.'

The sedge moved and the dog came out with a mallard drake in his jaws.
The grey-white neck and the green head were swaying up and down as a
snake's might move.  It was a movement without hope.

The boatman put the boat in sharp for shore.

'I'll take him,' the Colonel said.  'Bobby!'

He took the duck from the dog's light-holding mouth and felt him intact
and sound and beautiful to hold, and with his heart beating and his
captured, hopeless eyes.

He looked at him carefully, gentling him as you might gentle a horse.

'He's only wing-tipped,' he said.  'We'll keep him for a caller or to
turn loose in the spring.  Here, take him and put him in the sack with
the hen.'

The boatman took him carefully and put him in the burlap bag that was
under the bow.  The Colonel heard the hen speak to him.  Or, maybe she
is protesting, he thought.  He could not understand duck-talk through a
burlap bag.

'Take a shot of this,' he said to the boatman.  'It's damned cold
to-day.'

The boatman took the flask and drank deeply again.

'Thank you,' he said.  'Your grappa is very, very good.'




Chapter XLIII

At the landing, before the long low stone house by the side of the
canal, there were ducks laid out on the ground In rows.

They were laid in groups that were never of the same number.  There
were a few platoons, no companies, and, the Colonel drought, I barely
have a squad.

The head game-keeper was standing on the bank in his high boots, his
short jacket and his pushed back old felt hat, and he looked critically
at the number of ducks on the bow of the boat as they came alongshore.

'It was frozen-up at our post,' the Colonel said.

'I suspected so,' the head keeper said.  'I'm sorry.  It was supposed
to be the best post.'

'Who was top gun?'

'The Barone killed forty-two.  There was a little current there that
kept it open for a while.  You probably did not hear the shooting
because it was against the wind.'

'Where is everyone?'

'They're all gone except the Barone who is waiting for you.  Your
driver is asleep in the house.'

'He would be,' the Colonel said.

'Spread those out properly,' the head-keeper told the boatman who was a
game-keeper too.  'I want to put them to the game book.'

'There is one green-head drake in the bag who is only wing-tipped.'

'Good.  I will take good care of him.'

'I will go inside and see the Barone.  I'll see you later.'

'You must get warm,' the head keeper said.  'It's been a bitter day, my
Colonel.'

The Colonel started to walk towards the door of the house.

'I'll see you later,' he said to the boatman.

'Yes, my Colonel,' the boatman said.

Alvarito, the Barone, was standing by the open fire in the middle of
the room.  He smiled his shy smile and said to his low-pitched voice,
'I am sorry you did not have better shooting.'

'We froze up completely.  I enjoyed what there was very much.'

'Are you very cold?'

'Not too cold.'

'We can have something to eat.'

'Thank you.  I'm not hungry.  Have you eaten?'

'Yes.  The others went on and I let them take my car.  Can you give me
a lift to Latisana or just above?  I can get transportation from there.'

'Of course.'

'It was a shame that it should freeze.  The prospects were so good.'

'There must have been a world of ducks outside.'

'Yes.  But now they won't stay with their feed frozen over.  They will
be on their way south to-night.'

'Will they all go?'

'All except our local ducks that breed here.  They'll stay as long as
there is any open water.'

'I'm sorry for the shoot.'

'I'm sorry you came so far for so few ducks.'

'I always love the shoot,' the Colonel said.  'And I love Venice.'

The Barone Alvarito looked away and spread his hands towards the fire.
'Yes,' he said.  'We all love Venice.  Perhaps you do the best of all.'

The Colonel made no small talk on this but said, 'I love Venice as you
know.'

'Yes.  I know,' the Barone said.  He looked at nothing.  Then he said,
'We must wake your driver.'

'Has he eaten?'

'Eaten and slept and eaten and slept.  He has also read a little in
some illustrated books he brought with him.'

'Comic books,' the Colonel said.

'I should learn to read them,' the Barone said.  He smiled the shy,
dark smile.  'Could you get me some from Trieste?'

'Any amount,' the Colonel told him.  'From superman on up into the
improbable.  Read some for me.  Look, Alvarito, what was the matter
with that game-keeper who poled my boat?  He seemed to have a hatred
for me at the start.  Pretty well through, too.'

'It was the old battle-jacket.  Allied uniform affects him that way.
You see he was a bit over-liberated.'

'Go on.'

'When the Moroccans came through here they raped both his wife and his
daughter.'

'I think I'd better have a drink,' the Colonel said.

'There is grappa there on the table.'




Chapter XLIV

They had dropped the Barone off at a villa with great gates, a
gravelled drive and a house, which, since it was over six miles from
any military objective, had the good fortune not to have been bombed.

The Colonel had said good-bye and Alvarito had told him to come down
and shoot any, or every, week-end.

'You're sure you won't come in?'

'No.  I must get back to Trieste.  Will you give my love to Renata?'

'I will.  Is that her portrait that you have wrapped up in the back of
the car?'

'It is.'

'I'll tell her that you shot very well and that the portrait was in
good condition.'

'Also my love.'

'Also your love.'

'_Ciao_, Alvarito, and thank you very much.'

'_Ciao_, my Colonel.  If one can say _ciao_ to a Colonel.'

'Consider me not a Colonel.'

'It is very difficult.  Good-bye, my Colonel.'

'In case of any unforeseen contingencies would you ask her to have the
portrait picked up at the Gritti?'

'Yes, my Colonel.'

'That's all, I guess.'

'Good-bye, my Colonel.'




Chapter XLV

They were out on the road now and the early darkness was beginning.

'Turn left,' the Colonel said.

'That's not the road for Trieste, sir,' Jackson said.

'The hell with the road to Trieste.  I ordered you to turn left.  Do
you think there is only one way in the world to get to Trieste?'

'No, sir.  I was only pointing out to the Colonel----'

'Don't you point me out a God-damn thing and until I direct you
otherwise, don't speak to me until you are spoken to.'

'Yes, sir.'

'I'm sorry, Jackson.  What I mean is I know where I'm going and I want
to think.'

'Yes, sir.'

They were on the old road that he knew so well and the Colonel thought,
well, I sent four of the ducks I promised to those I promised them to
at the Gritti.  There wasn't enough shooting to be enough feathers to
do that boy's wife any good with feathers.  But they are all big ducks
and fat and they will be good eating.  I forgot to give Bobby the
sausage.

There was no time to write Renata a note.  But what could I say, in a
note, that we did not say?

He reached into his pocket and found a pad and pencil.  He put on the
map-reading light, and with his bad hand, printed a short message in
block letters.

'Put that in your pocket, Jackson, and act on it if necessary.  If the
circumstances described occur, it is an order.'

'Yes, sir,' Jackson said, and took the folded order blank with one hand
and put it in the top left-hand pocket of his tunic.

Now take it easy, the Colonel said to himself.  Any further concern you
may have is about yourself and that is just a luxury.

You are no longer of any real use to the Army of the United States.
That has been made quite clear.

You have said good-bye to your girl and she has said good-bye to you.
That is certainly simple.

You shot well and Alvarito understands.  That is that.

So what the hell do you have to worry about, boy?  I hope you're not
the type of jerk who worries about what happens to him when there's
nothing to be done.  Let's certainly hope not.

Just then it hit him as he had known it would since they had picked up
the decoys.

Three strikes is out, he thought, and they gave me four.  I've always
been a lucky son of a bitch.

It hit him again badly.

'Jackson,' he said.  'Do you know what General Thomas J. Jackson said
on one occasion?  On the occasion of his unfortunate death.  I
memorized it once.  I can't respond for its accuracy of course.  But
this is how it was reported: "Order A. P. Hill to prepare for action."
Then some more delirious stuff.  Then he said, "No, no, let us cross
over the river and rest under the shade of the trees."'

'That's very interesting, sir,' Jackson said.  'That must have been
Stonewall Jackson, sir.'

The Colonel started to speak but he stopped while it hit him the third
time and gripped bun so he knew he could not live.

'Jackson,' the Colonel said.  'Pull up at the side of the road and cut
to your parking lights.  Do you know the way to Trieste from here?'

'Yes, sir, I have my map.'

'Good.  I'm now going to get into the large back seat of this
god-damned, over-sized luxurious automobile.'

That was the last thing the Colonel ever said.  But he made the back
seat all right and he shut the door.  He shut it carefully and well.

After a while Jackson drove the car down the ditch and willow lined
road with the car's big lights on, looking for a place to turn.  He
found one, finally, and turned carefully.  When he was on the
right-hand side of the road, facing south towards the road junction
that would put him on the highway that led to Trieste, the one he was
familiar with, he put his map light on and took out the order blank and
read:


IN THE EVENT OF MY DEATH THE WRAPPED PAINTING AND THE TWO SHOT GUNS IN
THIS CAR WILL BE RETURNED TO THE HOTEL GRITTI WHERE THEY WILL BE
CLAIMED BY THEIR RIGHTFUL OWNER SIGNED RICHARD CANTWELL, COL.,
INFANTRY, U.S.A.


'They'll return them all right, through channels,' Jackson thought, and
put the car in gear.




[End of Across the River and Into the Trees, by Ernest Hemingway]




    _Dear Mr. J. P._


    _Just tell them you are a fictional character and it is your bad
    luck to have a writer put such language in your speeches. We all
    know how prettily the best brought up people speak but there are
    always those not quite out of the top drawer who have an 'orrid fear
    of vulgarity. You will know, too, how to deal with anyone who calls
    you Pop. Remember you weren't written of as Pop. It was all this
    fictional character. Anyway the book is for you and we miss you very
    much._

    _E. H._




PART I

PURSUIT AND CONVERSATION




CHAPTER ONE


We were sitting in the blind that Wanderobo hunters had built of twigs
and branches at the edge of the salt-lick when we heard the motor-lorry
coming. At first it was far away and no one could tell what the noise
was. Then it was stopped and we hoped it had been nothing or perhaps
only the wind. Then it moved slowly nearer, unmistakable now, louder and
louder until, agonizing in a clank of loud irregular explosions, it
passed close behind us to go on up the road. The theatrical one of the
two trackers stood up.

'It is finished,' he said.

I put my hand to my mouth and motioned him down.

'It is finished,' he said again and spread his arms wide. I had never
liked him and I liked him less now.

'After,' I whispered. M'Cola shook his head. I looked at his bald black
skull and he turned his face a little so that I saw the thin Chinese
hairs at the corners of his mouth.

'No good,' he said. '_Hapana m'uzuri._'

'Wait a little,' I told him. He bent his head down again so that it
would not show above the dead branches and we sat there in the dust of
the hole until it was too dark to see the front sight on my rifle; but
nothing more came. The theatrical tracker was impatient and restless. A
little before the last of the light was gone he whispered to M'Cola that
it was now too dark to shoot.

'Shut up, you,' M'Cola told him. 'The Bwana can shoot after you cannot
see.'

The other tracker, the educated one, gave another demonstration of his
education by scratching his name, Abdullah, on the black skin of his leg
with a sharp twig. I watched without admiration and M'Cola looked at the
word without a shadow of expression on his face. After a while the
tracker scratched it out.

Finally I made a last sight against what was left of the light and saw
it was no use, even with the large aperture.

M'Cola was watching.

'No good,' I said.

'Yes,' he agreed, in Swahili. 'Go to camp?'

'Yes.'

We stood up and made our way out of the blind and out through the trees,
walking on the sandy loam, feeling our way between trees and under
branches, back to the road. A mile along the road was the car. As we
came alongside, Kamau, the driver, put the lights on.

The lorry had spoiled it. That afternoon we had left the car up the road
and approached the salt-lick very carefully. There had been a little
rain, the day before, though not enough to flood the lick, which was
simply an opening in the trees with a patch of earth worn into deep
circles and grooved at the edges with hollows where the animals had
licked the dirt for salt, and we had seen long, heart-shaped, fresh
tracks of four greater kudu bulls that had been on the salt the night
before, as well as many newly pressed tracks of lesser kudu. There was
also a rhino who, from the tracks and the kicked-up mound of strawy
dung, came there each night. The blind had been built at close
arrow-shot of the lick, and sitting, leaning back, knees high, heads
low, in a hollow half full of ashes and dust, watching through the dried
leaves and thin branches I had seen a lesser kudu bull come out of the
brush to the edge of the opening where the salt was and stand there,
heavy-necked, grey, and handsome, the horns spiralled against the sun
while I sighted on his chest and then refused the shot, wanting not to
frighten the greater kudu that should surely come at dusk. But before we
ever heard the lorry the bull had heard it and run off into the trees,
and everything else that had been moving, in the bush on the flats, or
coming down from the small hills through the trees, coming toward the
salt, had halted at that exploding, clanking sound. They would come,
later, in the dark; but then it would be too late.

So now, going along the sandy track of the road in the car, the lights
picking out the eyes of night birds that squatted close on the sand
until the bulk of the car was on them and they rose in soft panic;
passing the fires of the travellers that all moved to the westward by
day along this road, abandoning the famine country that was ahead of us;
me sitting, the butt of my rifle on my foot, the barrel in the crook of
my left arm, a flask of whisky between my knees, pouring the whisky into
a tin cup and passing it over my shoulder in the dark for M'Cola to pour
water into it from the canteen, drinking this, the first one of the
day, the finest one there is, and looking at the thick bush we passed in
the dark, feeling the cool wind of the night and smelling the good smell
of Africa, I was altogether happy.

Then ahead we saw a big fire and as we came up and passed, I made out a
lorry beside the road. I told Kamau to stop and go back and as we backed
into the firelight there was a short, bandy-legged man with a Tyrolese
hat, leather shorts, and an open shirt standing before an unhooded
engine in a crowd of natives.

'Can we help?' I asked him.

'No,' he said. 'Unless you are a mechanic. It has taken a dislike to me.
All engines dislike me.'

'Do you think it could be the timer? It sounded as though it might be a
timing knock when you went past us.'

'I think it is much worse than that. It sounds to be something very
bad.'

'If you can get to our camp we have a mechanic.'

'How far is it?'

'About twenty miles.'

'In the morning I will try it. Now I am afraid to make it go farther
with that noise of death inside. It is trying to die because it dislikes
me. Well, I dislike it too. But if I die it would not annoy it.'

'Will you have a drink?' I held out the flask. 'Hemingway is my name.'

'Kandisky,' he said and bowed. 'Hemingway is a name I have heard. Where?
Where have I heard it? Oh, yes. The _dichter_. You know Hemingway the
poet?'

'Where did you read him?'

'In the _Querschnitt_.'

'That is me,' I said, very pleased. The _Querschnitt_ was a German
magazine I had written some rather obscene poems for, and published a
long story in, years before I could sell anything in America.

'This is very strange,' the man in the Tyrolese hat said. 'Tell me, what
do you think of Ringelnatz?'

'He is splendid.'

'So. You like Ringelnatz. Good. What do you think of Heinrich Mann?'

'He is no good.'

'You believe it?'

'All I know is that I cannot read him.'

'He is no good at all. I see we have things in common. What are you
doing here?'

'Shooting.'

'Not ivory, I hope.'

'No. For kudu.'

'Why should any man shoot a kudu? You, an intelligent man, a poet, to
shoot kudu.'

'I haven't shot any yet,' I said. 'But we've been hunting them hard now
for ten days. We would have got one to-night if it hadn't been for your
lorry.'

'That poor lorry. But you should hunt for a year. At the end of that
time you have shot everything and you are sorry for it. To hunt for one
special animal is nonsense. Why do you do it?'

'I like to do it.'

'Of course, if you _like_ to do it. Tell me, what do you really think of
Rilke?'

'I have read only the one thing.'

'Which?'

'The Cornet.'

'You liked it?'

'Yes.'

'I have no patience with it. It is snobbery. Valéry, yes. I see the
point of Valéry; although there is much snobbery too. Well at least you
do not kill elephants.'

'I'd kill a big enough one.'

'How big?'

'A seventy-pounder. Maybe smaller.'

'I see there are things we do not agree on. But it is a pleasure to meet
one of the great old _Querschnitt_ group. Tell me what is Joyce like? I
have not the money to buy it. Sinclair Lewis is nothing. I bought it.
No. No. Tell me to-morrow. You do not mind if I am camped near? You are
with friends? You have a white hunter?'

'With my wife. We would be delighted. Yes, a white hunter.'

'Why is he not out with you?'

'He believes you should hunt kudu alone.'

'It is better not to hunt them at all. What is he? English?'

'Yes.'

'Bloody English?'

'No. Very nice. You will like him.'

'You must go. I must not keep you. Perhaps I will see you to-morrow. It
was very strange that we should meet.'

'Yes,' I said. 'Have them look at the lorry to-morrow. Anything we can
do?'

'Good night,' he said. 'Good trip.'

'Good night,' I said. We started off and I saw him walking toward the
fire waving an arm at the natives. I had not asked him why he had twenty
up-country natives with him, nor where he was going. Looking back, I had
asked him nothing. I do not like to ask questions, and where I was
brought up it was not polite. But here we had not seen a white man for
two weeks, not since we had left Babati to go south, and then to run
into one on this road where you met only an occasional Indian trader and
the steady migration of the natives out of the famine country, to have
him look like a caricature of Benchley in Tyrolean costume, to have him
know your name, to call you a poet, to have read the _Querschnitt_, to
be an admirer of Joachim Ringelnatz and to want to talk about Rilke, was
too fantastic to deal with. So, just then, to crown this fantasy, the
lights of the car showed three tall, conical, mounds of something
smoking in the road ahead. I motioned to Kamau to stop, and putting on
the brakes we skidded just short of them. They were from two to three
feet high and when I touched one it was quite warm.

'_Tembo_,' M'Cola said.

It was dung from elephants that had just crossed the road, and in the
cold of the evening you could see it steaming. In a little while we were
in camp.

Next morning I was up and away to another salt-lick before daylight.
There was a kudu bull on the lick when we approached through the trees
and he gave a loud bark, like a dog's but higher in pitch and sharply
throaty, and was gone, making no noise at first, then crashing in the
brush when he was well away; and we never saw him. This lick had an
impossible approach. Trees grew around its open area so that it was as
though the game were in the blind and you had to come to them across the
open. The only way to make it would have been for one man to go alone
and crawl and then it would be impossible to get any sort of a close
shot through the interlacing trees until you were within twenty yards.
Of course once you were inside the protecting trees, and in the blind,
you were wonderfully placed, for anything that came to the salt had to
come out in the open twenty-five yards from any cover. But though we
stayed until eleven o'clock nothing came. We smoothed the dust of the
lick carefully with our feet so that any new tracks would show when we
came back again and walked the two miles to the road. Being hunted, the
game had learned to come only at night and leave before daylight. One
bull had stayed and our spooking him that morning would make it even
more difficult now.

This was the tenth day we had been hunting greater kudu and I had not
seen a mature bull yet. We had only three days more because the rains
were moving north each day from Rhodesia and unless we were prepared to
stay where we were through the rains we must be out as far as Handeni
before they came. We had set February 17th as the last safe date to
leave. Every morning now it took the heavy, woolly sky an hour or so
longer to clear and you could feel the rains coming, as they moved
steadily north, as surely as though you watched them on a chart.

Now it is pleasant to hunt something that you want very much over a long
period of time, being outwitted, out-manœuvred, and failing at the end
of each day, but having the hunt and knowing every time you are out
that, sooner or later, your luck will change and that you will get the
chance that you are seeking. But it is not pleasant to have a time limit
by which you must get your kudu or perhaps never get it, nor even see
one. It is not the way hunting should be. It is too much like those boys
who used to be sent to Paris with two years in which to make good as
writers or painters, after which, if they had not made good, they could
go home and into their fathers' businesses. The way to hunt is for as
long as you live against as long as there is such and such an animal;
just as the way to paint is as long as there is you and colours and
canvas, and to write as long as you can live and there is pencil and
paper or ink or any machine to do it with, or anything you care to write
about, and you feel a fool, and you are a fool, to do it any other way.
But here we were, now, caught by time, by the season, and by the running
out of our money, so that what should have been as much fun to do each
day whether you killed or not was being forced into that most exciting
perversion of life; the necessity of accomplishing something in less
time than should truly be allowed for its doing. So, coming in at noon,
up since two hours before daylight, with only three days left, I was
starting to be nervous about it, and there, at the table under the
dining tent fly, talking away, was Kandisky of the Tyrolese pants. I had
forgotten all about him.

'Hello. Hello,' he said. 'No success? Nothing doing? Where is the kudu?'

'He coughed once and went away,' I said. 'Hello, girl.'

She smiled. She was worried too. The two of them had been listening
since daylight for a shot. Listening all the time, even when our guest
had arrived; listening while writing letters, listening while reading,
listening when Kandisky came back and talked.

'You did not shoot him?'

'No. Nor see him.' I saw that Pop was worried too, and a little nervous.
There had evidently been considerable talking going on.

'Have a beer, Colonel,' he said to me.

'We spooked one,' I reported. 'No chance of a shot. There were plenty of
tracks. Nothing more came. The wind was blowing around. Ask the boys
about it.'

'As I was telling Colonel Phillips,' Kandisky began, shifting his
leather-breeched behind and crossing one heavy-calved, well-haired, bare
leg over the other, 'you must not stay here too long. You must realize
the rains are coming. There is one stretch of twelve miles beyond here
you can never get through if it rains. It is impossible.'

'So he's been telling me,' Pop said. 'I'm a Mister, by the way. We use
these military titles as nicknames. No offence if you're a colonel
yourself.' Then to me, 'Damn these salt-licks. If you'd leave them
alone you'd get one.'

'They ball it all up,' I agreed. 'You're so sure of a shot sooner or
later on the lick.'

'Hunt the hills too.'

'I'll hunt them, Pop.'

'What is killing a kudu, anyway?' Kandisky asked. 'You should not take
it so seriously. It is nothing. In a year you kill twenty.'

'Best not say anything about that to the game department, though,' Pop
said.

'You misunderstand,' Kandisky said. 'I mean in a year a man could. Of
course no man would wish to.'

'Absolutely,' Pop said. 'If he lived in kudu country, he could. They're
the commonest big antelope in this bush country. It's just that when you
want to see them you don't.'

'I kill nothing, you understand,' Kandisky told us. 'Why are you not
more interested in the natives?'

'We are,' my wife assured him.

'They are really interesting. Listen ...' Kandisky said, and he spoke on
to her.

'The hell of it is,' I said to Pop, 'when I'm in the hills I'm sure the
bastards are down there on the salt. The cows are in the hills but I
don't believe the bulls are with them now. Then you get there in the
evening and there are the tracks. They _have_ been on the lousy salt. I
think they come any time.'

'Probably they do.'

'I'm sure we get different bulls there. They probably only come to the
salt every couple of days. Some are certainly spooked because Karl shot
that one. If he'd only killed it clean instead of following it through
the whole damn countryside. Christ, if he'd only kill any damn thing
clean. Other new ones will come in. All we have to do is to wait them
out, though. Of course they can't all know about it. But he's spooked
this country to hell.'

'He gets so very excited,' Pop said. 'But he's a good lad. He made a
beautiful shot on that leopard, you know. You don't want them killed any
cleaner than that. Let it quiet down again.'

'Sure. I don't mean anything when I curse him.'

'What about staying in the blind all day?'

'The damned wind started to go round in a circle. It blew our scent
every direction. No use to sit there broadcasting it. If the damn wind
would hold. Abdullah took an ash can to-day.'

'I saw him starting off with it.'

There wasn't a bit of wind when we stalked the salt and there was just
light to shoot. He tried the wind with the ashes all the way. I went
alone with Abdullah and left the others behind and we went quietly. I
had on these crêpe-soled boots and it's soft cotton dirt. The bastard
spooked at fifty yards.

'Did you ever see their ears?'

'Did I ever see their ears? If I can see his ears, the skinner can work
on him.'

'They're bastards,' Pop said. 'I hate this salt-lick business. They're
not as smart as we think. The trouble is you're working on them where
they are smart. They've been shot at there ever since there's been
salt.'

'That's what makes it fun,' I said. 'I'd be glad to do it for a month. I
like to hunt sitting on my tail. No sweat. No nothing. Sit there and
catch flies and feed them to the ant lions in the dust. I like it. But
what about the time?'

'That's it. The time.'

'So,' Kandisky was saying to my wife. 'That is what you should see. The
big _ngomas_. The big native dance festivals. The real ones.'

'Listen,' I said to Pop. 'The other lick, the one I was at last night,
is fool-proof except for being near that _bloody_ road.'

'The trackers say it is really the property of the lesser kudu. It's a
long way too. It's eighty miles there and back.'

'I know. But there were four _big_ bull tracks. It's certain. If it
wasn't for that lorry last night. What about staying there to-night!
Then I'd get the night and the early morning and give this lick a rest.
There's a big rhino there too. Big track, anyway.'

'Good,' Pop said. 'Shoot the rhino too.' He hated to have anything
killed except what we were after, no killing on the side, no ornamental
killing, no killing to kill, only when you wanted it more than you
wanted not to kill it, only when getting it was necessary to his being
first in his trade, and I saw he was offering up the rhino to please me.

'I won't kill him unless he's good,' I promised.

'Shoot the bastard,' Pop said, making a gift of him.

'Ah, Pop,' I said.

'Shoot him,' said Pop. 'You'll enjoy it, being by yourself. You can sell
the horn if you don't want it. You've still one on your licence.'

'So,' said Kandisky. 'You have arranged a plan of campaign? You have
decided on how to outwit the poor animals?'

'Yes,' I said. 'How is the lorry?'

'That lorry is finished,' the Austrian said. 'In a way I am glad. It was
too much of a symbol. It was all that remained of my _shamba_. Now
everything is gone and it is much simpler.'

'What is a shamba?' asked P.O.M., my wife. 'I've been hearing about them
for months. I'm afraid to ask about those words every one uses.'

'A plantation,' he said. 'It is all gone except that lorry. With the
lorry I carry labourers to the shamba of an Indian. It is a very rich
Indian who raises sisal. I am a manager for this Indian. An Indian can
make a profit from a sisal shamba.'

'From anything,' Pop said.

'Yes. Where we fail, where we would starve, he makes money. This Indian
is very intelligent, however. He values me. I represent European
organization. I come now from organizing recruitment of the natives.
This takes time. It is impressive. I have been away from my family for
three months. The organization is organized. You do it in a week as
easily, but it is not so impressive.'

'And your wife?' asked mine.

'She waits at my house, the house of the manager, with my daughter.'

'Does she love you very much?' my wife asked.

'She must, or she would be gone long ago.'

'How old is the daughter?'

'She is thirteen now.'

'It must be very nice to have a daughter.'

'You cannot know how nice it is. It is like a second wife. My wife knows
now all I think, all I say, all I believe, all I can do, all that I
cannot do and cannot be. I know also about my wife--completely. But now
there is always someone you do not know, who does not know you, who
loves you in ignorance and is strange to you both. Some one very
attractive that is yours and not yours and that makes the conversation
more--how shall I say? Yes, it is like--what do you call--having here
with you--with the two of you--yes there--it is the Heinz Tomato Ketchup
on the daily food.'

'That's very good,' I said.

'We have books,' he said. 'I cannot buy new books now but we can always
talk. Ideas and conversation are very interesting. We discuss all
things. Everything. We have a very interesting mental life. Formerly,
with the shamba, we had the _Querschnitt_. That gave you a feeling of
belonging, of being made a part of, to a very brilliant group of people.
The people one would see if one saw whom one wished to see. You know all
of those people? You must know them.'

'Some of them.' I said. 'Some in Paris. Some in Berlin.'

I did not wish to destroy anything this man had, and so I did not go
into those brilliant people in detail.

'They're marvellous,' I said, lying.

'I envy you to know them,' he said. 'And tell me, who is the greatest
writer in America?'

'My husband,' said my wife.

'No. I do not mean for you to speak from family pride. I mean who
really? Certainly not Upton Sinclair. Certainly not Sinclair Lewis. Who
is your Thomas Mann? Who is your Valéry?'

'We do not have great writers,' I said. 'Something happens to our good
writers at a certain age. I can explain but it is quite long and may
bore you.'

'Please explain,' he said. 'This is what I enjoy. This is the best part
of life. The life of the mind. This is not killing kudu.'

'You haven't heard it yet,' I said.

'Ah, but I can see it coming. You must take more beer to loosen your
tongue.'

'It's loose,' I told him. 'It's always too loose. But _you_ don't drink
anything.'

'No, I never drink. It is not good for the mind. It is unnecessary. But
tell me. Please tell me.'

'Well,' I said, 'we have had, in America, skilful writers. Poe is a
skilful writer. It is skilful, marvellously constructed, and it is dead.
We have had writers of rhetoric who had the good fortune to find a
little, in a chronicle of another man and from voyaging, of how things,
actual things, can be, whales for instance, and this knowledge is
wrapped in the rhetoric like plums in a pudding. Occasionally it is
there, alone, unwrapped in pudding, and it is good. This is Melville.
But the people who praise it, praise it for the rhetoric which is not
important. They put a mystery in which is not there.'

'Yes,' he said. 'I see. But it is the mind working, its ability to work,
which makes the rhetoric. Rhetoric is the blue sparks from the dynamo.'

'Sometimes. And sometimes it is only blue sparks, and what is the dynamo
driving?'

'So. Go on.'

'I've forgotten.'

'No. Go on. Do not pretend to be stupid.'

'Did you ever get up before daylight ...'

'Every morning,' he said. 'Go on.'

'All right. There were others who wrote like exiled English colonials
from an England of which they were never a part to a newer England that
they were making. Very good men with the small, dried, and excellent
wisdom of Unitarians; men of letters; Quakers with a sense of humour.'

'Who were these?'

'Emerson, Hawthorne, Whittier, and Company. All our early classics who
did not know that a new classic does not bear any resemblance to the
classics that have preceded it. It can steal from anything that it is
better than, anything that is not a classic, all classics do that. Some
writers are only born to help another writer to write one sentence. But
it cannot derive from or resemble a previous classic. Also all these men
were gentlemen, or wished to be. They were all very respectable. They
did not use the words that people always have used in speech, the words
that survive in language. Nor would you gather that they had bodies.
They had minds, yes. Nice, dry, clean minds. This is all very dull, I
would not state it except that you ask for it.'

'Go on.'

'There is one at that time that is supposed to be really good. Thoreau.
I cannot tell you about it because I have not yet been able to read it.
But that means nothing because I cannot read other naturalists unless
they are being extremely accurate and not literary. Naturalists should
all work alone and some one else should correlate their findings for
them. Writers should work alone. They should see each other only after
their work is done, and not too often then. Otherwise they become like
writers in New York. All angleworms in a bottle, trying to derive
knowledge and nourishment from their own contact and from the bottle.
Sometimes the bottle is shaped art, sometimes economics, sometimes
economic-religion. But once they are in the bottle they stay there. They
are lonesome outside of the bottle. They do not want to be lonesome.
They are afraid to be alone in their beliefs and no woman would love any
of them enough so that they could kill their lonesomeness in that woman,
or pool it with hers, or make something with her that makes the rest
unimportant.'

'But what about Thoreau?'

'You'll have to read him. Maybe I'll be able to later. I can do nearly
everything later.'

'Better have some more beer, Papa.'

'All right.'

'What about the good writers?'

'The good writers are Henry James, Stephen Crane, and Mark Twain. That's
not the order they're good in. There is no order for good writers.'

'Mark Twain is a humorist. The others I do not know.'

'All modern American literature comes from one book by Mark Twain called
_Huckleberry Finn_. If you read it you must stop where the Nigger Jim is
stolen from the boys. That is the real end. The rest is just cheating.
But it's the best book we've had. All American writing comes from that.
There was nothing before. There has been nothing as good since.'

'What about the others?'

'Crane wrote two fine stories. _The Open Boat_ and _The Blue Hotel_. The
last one is the better.'

'And what happened to him?'

'He died. That's simple. He was dying from the start.'

'But the other two?'

'They both lived to be old men but they did not get any wiser as they
got older. I don't know what they really wanted. You see we make our
writers into something very strange.'

'I do not understand.'

'We destroy them in many ways. First, economically. They make money. It
is only by hazard that a writer makes money although good books always
make money eventually. Then our writers when they have made some money
increase their standard of living and they are caught. They have to
write to keep up their establishments, their wives, and so on, and they
write slop. It is slop not on purpose but because it is hurried.
Because they write when there is nothing to say or no water in the well.
Because they are ambitious. Then, once they have betrayed themselves,
they justify it and you get more slop. Or else they read the critics. If
they believe the critics when they say they are great then they must
believe them when they say they are rotten and they lose confidence. At
present we have two good writers who cannot write because they have lost
confidence through reading critics. If they wrote, sometimes it would be
good and sometimes not so good and sometimes it would be quite bad, but
the good would get out. But they have read the critics and they must
write masterpieces. The masterpieces the critics said they wrote. They
weren't masterpieces, of course. They were just quite good books. So now
they cannot write at all. The critics have made them impotent.'

'Who are these writers?'

'Their names would mean nothing to you and by now they may have written,
become frightened, and be impotent again.'

'But what is it that happens to American writers? Be definite.'

'I was not here in the old days so I cannot tell you about them, but now
there are various things. At a certain age the men writers change into
Old Mother Hubbard. The women writers become Joan of Arc without the
fighting. They become leaders. It doesn't matter who they lead. If they
do not have followers they invent them. It is useless for those selected
as followers to protest. They are accused of disloyalty. Oh, hell.
There are too many things happen to them. That is one thing. The others
try to save their souls with what they write. That is an easy way out.
Others are ruined by the first money, the first praise, the first
attack, the first time they find they cannot write, or the first time
they cannot do anything else, or else they get frightened and join
organizations that do their thinking for them. Or they do not know what
they want. Henry James wanted to make money. He never did, of course.'

'And you?'

'I am interested in other things. I have a good life but I must write
because if I do not write a certain amount I do not enjoy the rest of my
life.'

'And what do you want?'

'To write as well as I can and learn as I go along. At the same time I
have my life which I enjoy and which is a damned good life.'

'Hunting kudu?'

'Yes. Hunting kudu and many other things.'

'What other things?'

'Plenty of other things.'

'And you know what you want?'

'Yes.'

'You really like to do this, what you do now, this silliness of kudu?'

'Just as much as I like to be in the Prado.'

'One is not better than the other?'

'One is as necessary as the other. There are other things, too.'

'Naturally. There must be. But this sort of thing means something to
you, really?'

'Truly.'

'And you know what you want?'

'Absolutely, and I get it all the time.'

'But it takes money.'

'I could always make money, and besides I have been very lucky.'

'Then you are happy?'

'Except when I think of other people.'

'Then you think of other people?'

'Oh, yes.'

'But you do nothing for them?'

'No.'

'Nothing?'

'Maybe a little.'

'Do you think your writing is worth doing--as an end in itself?'

'Oh, yes.'

'You are sure?'

'Very sure.'

'That must be very pleasant.'

'It is,' I said. 'It is the one altogether pleasant thing about it.'

'This is getting awfully serious,' my wife said.

'It's a damned serious subject.'

'You see, he is really serious about something,' Kandisky said. 'I knew
he must be serious on something besides kudu.'

'The reason everyone now tries to avoid it, to deny that it is
important, to make it seem vain to try to do it, is because it is so
difficult. Too many factors must combine to make it possible.'

'What is this now?'

'The kind of writing that can be done. How far prose can be carried if
anyone is serious enough and has luck. There is a fourth and fifth
dimension that can be gotten.'

'You believe it?'

'I know it.'

'And if a writer can get this?'

'Then nothing else matters. It is more important than anything he can
do. The chances are, of course, that he will fail. But there is a chance
that he succeeds.'

'But that is poetry you are talking about.'

'No. It is much more difficult than poetry. It is a prose that has never
been written. But it can be written, without tricks and without
cheating. With nothing that will go bad afterwards.'

'And why has it not been written?'

'Because there are too many factors. First, there must be talent, much
talent. Talent such as Kipling had. Then there must be discipline. The
discipline of Flaubert. Then there must be the conception of what it can
be and an absolute conscience as unchanging as the standard meter in
Paris, to prevent faking. Then the writer must be intelligent and
disinterested and above all he must survive. Try to get all these in one
person and have him come through all the influences that press on a
writer. The hardest thing, because time is so short, is for him to
survive and get his work done. But I would like us to have such a writer
and to read what he would write. What do you say? Should we talk about
something else?'

'It is interesting what you say. Naturally I do not agree with
everything.'

'Naturally.'

'What about a gimlet?' Pop asked. 'Don't you think a gimlet might help?'

'Tell me first what are the things, the actual, concrete things that
harm a writer?'

I was tired of the conversation which was becoming an interview. So I
would make it an interview and finish it. The necessity to put a
thousand intangibles into a sentence, now, before lunch, was too bloody.

'Politics, women, drink, money, ambition. And the lack of politics,
women, drink, money and ambition,' I said profoundly.

'He's getting much too easy now,' Pop said.

'But drink. I do not understand about that. That has always seemed silly
to me. I understand it as a weakness.'

'It is a way of ending a day. It has great benefits. Don't you ever want
to change your ideas?'

'Let's have one,' Pop said. 'M'Wendi!'

Pop never drank before lunch except as a mistake and I knew he was
trying to help me out.

'Let's all have a gimlet,' I said.

'I never drink,' Kandisky said. 'I will go to the lorry and fetch some
fresh butter for lunch. It is fresh from Kandoa, unsalted. Very good.
To-night we will have a special dish of Viennese dessert. My cook has
learned to make it very well.'

He went off and my wife said: 'You were getting awfully profound. What
was that about all these women?'

'What women?'

'When you were talking about women.'

'The hell with them,' I said. 'Those are the ones you get involved with
when you're drunk.'

'So that's what you do.'

'No.'

'I don't get involved with people when I'm drunk.'

'Come, come,' said Pop. 'We're none of us ever drunk. My God, that man
can talk.'

'He didn't have a chance to talk after B'wana M'Kumba started.'

'I did have verbal dysentery,' I said.

'What about his lorry? Can we tow it in without ruining ours?'

'I think so,' Pop said. 'When ours comes back from Handeni.'

At lunch under the green fly of the dining-tent, in the shade of a big
tree, the wind blowing, the fresh butter much admired, Grant's gazelle
chops, mashed potatoes, green corn, and then mixed fruit for dessert,
Kandisky told us why the East Indians were taking the country over.

'You see, during the war they sent the Indian troops to fight here. To
keep them out of India because they feared another mutiny. They
promised the Aga Khan that because they fought in Africa, Indians could
come freely to settle and for business afterwards. They cannot break
that promise and now the Indians have taken the country over from the
Europeans. They live on nothing and they send all the money back to
India. When they have made enough to go home they leave, bringing out
their poor relations to take over from them and continue to exploit the
country.'

Pop said nothing. He would not argue with a guest at table.

'It is the Aga Khan,' Kandisky said. 'You are an American. You know
nothing of these combinations.'

'Were you with Von Lettöw?' Pop asked him.

'From the start,' Kandisky said. 'Until the end.'

'He was a great fighter,' Pop said. 'I have great admiration for him.'

'You fought?' Kandisky asked.

'Yes.'

'I do not care for Lettöw,' Kandisky said. 'He fought, yes. No one ever
better. When we wanted quinine he would order it captured. All supplies
the same. But afterwards he cared nothing for his men. After the war I
am in Germany. I go to see about indemnification for my property. "You
are an Austrian," they say. "You must go through Austrian channels." So
I go to Austria. "But why did you fight?" they ask me. "You cannot hold
us responsible. Suppose you go to fight in China. That is your own
affair. We cannot do anything for you."

'"But I went as a patriot," I say, very foolishly. "I fight where I can
because I am an Austrian and I know my duty." "Yes," they say. "That is
very beautiful. But you cannot hold us responsible for your noble
sentiments." So they passed me from one to the other and nothing. Still
I love the country very much. I have lost everything here but I have
more than anyone has in Europe. To me it is always interesting. The
natives and the language. I have many books of notes on them. Then too,
in reality, I am a king here. It is very pleasant. Waking in the morning
I extend one foot and the boy places the sock on it. When I am ready I
extend the other foot and he adjusts the other sock. I step from under
the mosquito bar into my drawers which are held for me. Don't you think
that is very marvellous?'

'It's marvellous.'

'When you come back another time we must take a safari to study the
natives. And shoot nothing, or only to eat. Look, I will show you a
dance and sing a song.'

Crouched, elbows lifting and falling, knees humping, he shuffled around
the table, singing. Undoubtedly it was very fine.

'That is only one of a thousand,' he said. 'Now I must go for a time.
You will be sleeping.'

'There's no hurry. Stay around.'

'No. Surely you will be sleeping. I also. I will take the butter to keep
it cool.'

'We'll see you at supper,' Pop said.

'Now you must sleep. Good-bye.'

After he was gone, Pop said: 'I wouldn't believe all that about the Aga
Khan, you know.'

'It sounded pretty good.'

'Of course he feels badly,' Pop said. 'Who wouldn't. Von Lettöw was a
hell of a man.'

'He's very intelligent,' my wife said. 'He talks wonderfully about the
natives. But he's bitter about American women.'

'So am I,' said Pop. 'He's a good man. You better get some shut-eye.
You'll need to start about three-thirty.'

'Have them call me.'

Molo raised the back of the tent, propping it with sticks, so the wind
blew through and I went to sleep reading, the wind coming in cool and
fresh under the heated canvas.

When I woke it was time to go. There were rain clouds in the sky and it
was very hot. They had packed some tinned fruit, a five-pound piece of
roast meat, bread, tea, a tea pot, and some tinned milk in a whisky box
with four bottles of beer. There was a canvas water bag and a ground
cloth to use as a tent. M'Cola was taking the big gun out to the car.

'There's no hurry about getting back,' Pop said. 'We'll look for you
when we see you.'

'All right.'

'We'll send the lorry to haul that sportsman into Handeni. He's sending
his men ahead walking.'

'You're sure the lorry can stand it? Don't do it because he's a friend
of mine.'

'Have to get him out. The lorry will be in to-night.'

'The Memsahib's still asleep,' I said. 'Maybe she can get out for a walk
and shoot some guineas?'

'I'm here,' she said. 'Don't worry about us. _Oh_, I hope you get them.'

'Don't send out to look for us along the road until day after
to-morrow,' I said. 'If there's a good chance we'll stay.'

'Good luck.'

'Good luck, sweet. Good-bye, Mr. J. P.'




CHAPTER TWO


We were out from under the shade of camp and along the sandy river of a
road, driving into the western sun, the bush thick to the edge of the
sand, solid as a thicket, the little hills rising above it, and all
along the road we passed groups of people making their way to the
westward. Some were naked except for a greasy cloth knotted over one
shoulder, and carried bows and sealed quivers of arrows. Others carried
spears. The wealthy carried umbrellas and wore draped white cloth and
their women walked behind them, with their pots and pans. Bundles and
loads of skins were scattered along ahead on the heads of other natives.
All were travelling away from the famine. And in the heat, my feet out
over the side of the car to keep them away from the heat of the engine,
hat low over the eyes against the sun, watching the road, the people,
and all clearings in the bush for game, we drove to the westward.

Once we saw three lesser kudu cows in an open place of broken bush.
Grey, big bellied, long necked, small headed, and with big ears, they
moved quickly into the woods and were gone. We left the car and tracked
them but there was no bull track.

A little beyond there a flock of guineas quick-legged across the road
running steady-headed with the motion of trotters. As I jumped from the
car and sprinted after them they rocketed up, their legs tucked close
beneath them, heavy-bodied, short wings drumming, cackling, to go over
the trees ahead. I dropped two that thumped hard when they fell and as
they lay, wings beating, Abdullah cut their heads off so they would be
legal eating. He put them in the car where M'Cola sat laughing; his old
man's healthy laugh, his making-fun-of-me laugh, his bird-shooting laugh
that dated from a streak of raging misses one time that had delighted
him. Now when I killed, it was a joke, as when we shot a hyena; the
funniest joke of all. He laughed always to see the birds tumble and when
I missed he roared and shook his head again and again.

'Ask him what the hell he's laughing about?' I asked Pop once.

'At B'wana,' M'Cola said, and shook his head, 'at the little birds.'

'He thinks you're funny,' Pop said.

'Goddam it. I am funny. But the hell with him.'

'He thinks you're very funny,' Pop said. 'Now the Memsahib and I would
never laugh.'

'Shoot them yourself.'

'No, you're the bird shot. The self-confessed bird shot,' she said.

So bird shooting became this marvellous joke. If I killed, the joke was
on the birds and M'Cola would shake his head and laugh and make his
hands go round and round to show how the bird turned over in the air.
And if I missed, I was the clown of the piece and he would look at me
and shake with laughing. Only the hyenas were funnier.

Highly humorous was the hyena obscenely loping, full belly dragging, at
daylight on the plain, who, shot from the stern, skittered on into speed
to tumble end over end. Mirth provoking was the hyena that stopped out
of range by an alkali lake to look back and, hit in the chest, went over
on his back, his four feet and his full belly in the air. Nothing could
be more jolly than the hyena coming suddenly wedge-headed and stinking
out of high grass by a _donga_, hit at ten yards, who raced his tail in
three narrowing, scampering circles until he died.

It was funny to M'Cola to see a hyena shot at close range. There was
that comic slap of the bullet and the hyena's agitated surprise to find
death inside of him. It was funnier to see a hyena shot at a great
distance, in the heat shimmer of the plain, to see him go over
backwards, to see him start that frantic circle, to see that electric
speed that meant that he was racing the little nickeled death inside
him. But the great joke of all, the thing M'Cola waved his hands across
his face about, and turned away and shook his head and laughed, ashamed
even of the hyena; the pinnacle of hyenic humour, was the hyena, the
classic hyena, that hit too far back while running, would circle madly,
snapping and tearing at himself until he pulled his own intestines out,
and then stood there, jerking them out and eating them with relish.

'_Fisi_,' M'Cola would say and shake his head in delighted sorrow at
there being such an awful beast. Fisi, the hyena, hermaphroditic,
self-eating devourer of the dead, trailer of calving cows, ham-stringer,
potential biter-off of your face at night while you slept, sad yowler,
camp-follower, stinking, foul, with jaws that crack the bones the lion
leaves, belly dragging, loping away on the brown plain, looking back,
mongrel dog-smart in the face; whack from the little Mannlicher and then
the horrid circle starting. 'Fisi,' M'Cola laughed, ashamed of him,
shaking his bald black head. 'Fisi. Eats himself. Fisi.'

The hyena was a dirty joke but bird shooting was a clean joke. My whisky
was a clean joke. There were many variations of that joke. Some we come
to later. The Mohammedans and all religions were a joke. A joke on all
the people who had them. Charo, the other gun bearer, was short, very
serious and highly religious. All Ramadan he never swallowed his saliva
until sunset and when the sun was almost down I'd see him watching
nervously. He had a bottle with him of some sort of tea and he would
finger it and watch the sun and I would see M'Cola watching him and
pretending not to see. This was not outrightly funny to him. This was
something that he could not laugh about openly but that he felt superior
to and wondered at the silliness of it. The Mohammedan religion was very
fashionable and all the higher social grades among the boys were
Mohammedans. It was something that gave caste, something to believe in,
something fashionable and god-giving to suffer a little for each year,
something that made you superior to other people, something that gave
you more complicated habits of eating, something that I understood and
M'Cola did not understand, nor care about, and he watched Charo watch
for the sun to set with that blank look on his face that it put on about
all things that he was not a part of. Charo was deadly thirsty and truly
devout and the sun set very slowly. I looked at it, red over the trees,
nudged him and he grinned. M'Cola offered me the water bottle solemnly.
I shook my head and Charo grinned again. M'Cola looked blank. Then the
sun was down and Charo had the bottle tilted up, his Adam's apple rising
and falling greedily and M'Cola looking at him and then looking away.

In the early days, before we became good friends, he did not trust me at
all. When anything came up he went into this blankness. I liked Charo
much better then. We understood each other on the question of religion
and Charo admired my shooting and always shook hands and smiled when we
had killed anything particularly good. This was flattering and pleasing.
M'Cola looked on all this early shooting as a series of lucky accidents.
We were supposed to shoot. We had not yet shot anything that amounted to
anything and he was not really my gun bearer. He was Mr. Jackson
Phillip's gun bearer and he had been loaned to me. I meant nothing to
him. He did not like me nor dislike me. He was politely contemptuous of
Karl. Who he liked was Mama.

The evening we killed the first lion it was dark when we came in sight
of camp. The killing of the lion had been confused and unsatisfactory.
It was agreed beforehand that P.O.M. should have the first shot but
since it was the first lion any of us had ever shot at, and it was very
late in the day, really too late to take the lion on, once he was hit we
were to make a dogfight of it and anyone was free to get him. This was a
good plan as it was nearly sundown and if the lion got into cover,
wounded, it would be too dark to do anything about it without a mess. I
remember seeing the lion looking yellow and heavy-headed and enormous
against a scrubby looking tree in a patch of orchard bush and P.O.M.
kneeling to shoot and wanting to tell her to sit down and make sure of
him. Then there was the short-barrelled explosion of the Mannlicher and
the lion was going to the left on a run, a strange, heavy-shouldered,
foot-swinging, cat run. I hit him with the Springfield and he went down
and spun over and I shot again, too quickly, and threw a cloud of dirt
over him. But there he was, stretched out, on his belly, and, with the
sun just over the top of the trees, and the grass very green, we walked
up on him like a posse, or a gang of Black and Tans, guns ready and
cocked, not knowing whether he was stunned or dead. When we were close
M'Cola threw a stone at him. It hit him in the flank and from the way it
hit you could tell he was a dead animal. I was sure P.O.M. had hit him
but there was only one bullet hole, well back, just below the spine and
ranging forward to come to the surface under the skin of the chest. You
could feel the bullet under the skin and M'Cola made a slit and cut it
out. It was a 220-grain solid bullet from the Springfield and it had
raked him, going through lungs and heart.

I was so surprised by the way he had rolled over dead from the shot
after we had been prepared for a charge, for heroics, and for drama,
that I felt more let down than pleased. It was our first lion and we
were very ignorant and this was not what we had paid to see. Charo and
M'Cola both shook P.O.M.'s hand and then Charo came over and shook hands
with me.

'Good shot, B'wana,' he said in Swahili. '_Piga m'uzuri._'

'Did you shoot, Karl?' I asked.

'No. I was just going to when you shot.'

'You didn't shoot him, Pop?'

'No. You'd have heard it.' He opened the breech and took out the two big
·450 No. 2's.

'I'm sure I missed him,' P.O.M. said.

'I was sure you hit him. I still think you hit him,' I said.

'Mama hit,' M'Cola said.

'Where?' Charo asked.

'Hit,' said M'Cola. 'Hit.'

'You rolled him over,' Pop said to me. 'God, he went over like a
rabbit.'

'I couldn't believe it.'

'Mama _piga_,' M'Cola said. '_Piga Simba._'

As we saw the camp fire in the dark ahead of us, coming in that night,
M'Cola suddenly commenced to shout a stream of high-pitched, rapid,
singing words in Wakamba ending in the word '_Simba_'. Someone at the
camp shouted back one word.

'Mama!' M'Cola shouted. Then another long stream. Then 'Mama! Mama!'

Through the dark came all the porters, the cook, the skinner, the boys,
and the headman.

'Mama!' M'Cola shouted. 'Mama _piga Simba_.'

The boys came dancing, crowing, and beating time and chanting something
from down in their chests that started like a cough and sounded like
'_Hey la Mama! Hay la Mama! Hey la Mama!_'

The rolling-eyed skinner picked P.O.M. up, the big cook and the boys
held her, and the others pressing forward to lift and if not to lift to
touch and hold, they danced and sang through the dark around the fire
and to our tent.

'_Hey la Mama! huh! huh! huh! Hay la Mama! huh! huh! huh!_' they sang
the lion dance with that deep, lion asthmatic cough in it. Then at the
tent they put her down and everyone, very shyly, shook hands, the boys
saying '_m'uzuri, Memsahib_,' and M'Cola and the porters all saying
'_m'uzuri_, Mama' with much feeling in the accenting of the word 'Mama'.

Afterwards in the chairs in front of the fire, sitting with the drinks,
Pop said, 'You shot it. M'Cola would kill anyone who said you didn't.'

'You know, I feel as though I did shoot it,' P.O.M. said. 'I don't
believe I'd be able to stand it if I really had shot it. I'd be too
proud. Isn't triumph marvellous?'

'Good old Mama,' Karl said.

'I believe you did shoot him,' I said.

'Oh, let's not go into that,' P.O.M. said. 'I feel so wonderful about
just being supposed to have killed him. You know people never used to
carry me on their shoulders much at home.'

'No one knows how to behave in America,' Pop said. 'Most uncivilized.'

'We'll carry you in Key West,' Karl said. 'Poor old Mama.'

'Let's not talk about it,' P.O.M. said. 'I like it too much. Shouldn't I
maybe distribute largess?'

'They didn't do it for that,' Pop said. 'But it is all right to give
something to celebrate.'

'Oh, I want to give them all a great deal of money,' P.O.M. said. 'Isn't
triumph simply marvellous?'

'Good old Mama,' I said. 'You killed him.'

'No, I didn't. Don't lie to me. Just let me enjoy my triumph.'

Anyway M'Cola did not trust me for a long time. Until P.O.M.'s licence
ran out, she was his favourite and we were simply a lot of people who
interfered and kept Mama from shooting things. Once her licence was out
and she was no longer shooting, she dropped back into non-combatant
status with him and as we began to hunt kudu and Pop stayed in camp and
sent us out alone with the trackers, Karl with Charo and M'Cola and I
together, M'Cola dropped Pop visibly in his estimation. It was only
temporary of course. He was Pop's man and I believe his working
estimations were only from day to day and required an unbroken series of
events to have any meaning. But something had happened between us.




PART II

PURSUIT REMEMBERED




CHAPTER ONE


It dated back to the time of Droopy, after I had come back from being
ill in Nairobi and we had gone on a foot safari to hunt rhino in the
forest. Droopy was a real savage with lids to his eyes that nearly
covered them, handsome, with a great deal of style, a fine hunter and a
beautiful tracker. He was about thirty-five, I should think, and wore
only a piece of cloth knotted over one shoulder, and a fez that some
hunter had given him. He always carried a spear. M'Cola wore an old U.S.
Army khaki tunic, complete with buttons, that had originally been
brought out for Droopy, who had been away somewhere and had missed
getting it. Twice Pop had brought it out for Droopy and finally M'Cola
had said, 'Give it to me'.

Pop had let him have it and M'Cola had worn it ever since. It, a pair of
shorts, his fuzzy wool curler's cap, and a knitted army sweater he wore
when washing the tunic, were the only garments I ever saw on the old man
until he took my bird-shooting coat. For shoes he used sandals cut from
old motor-car tyres. He had slim, handsome legs with well-turned ankles
on the style of Babe Ruth's and I remember how surprised I was the first
time I saw him with the tunic off and noticed how old his upper body
was. It had that aged look you see in photographs of Jeffries and
Sharkey posing thirty years after, the ugly, old-man biceps and the
fallen pectoral muscles.

'How old is M'Cola?' I asked Pop.

'He must be over fifty,' Pop said. 'He's got a grown-up family in the
native reserve.'

'How are his kids?'

'No good, worthless. He can't handle them. We tried one as a porter. But
he was no good.'

M'Cola was not jealous of Droopy. He simply knew that Droopy was a
better man than he was. More of a hunter, a faster and a cleaner
tracker, and a great stylist in everything he did. He admired Droopy in
the same way we did and being out with him, it made him realize that he
was wearing Droopy's tunic and that he had been a porter before he
became a gun bearer and suddenly he ceased being an old timer and we
were hunting together; he and I hunting together and Droopy in command
of the show.

That had been a fine hunt. The afternoon of the day we came into the
country we walked about four miles from camp along a deep rhino trail
that graded through the grassy hills with their abandoned
orchard-looking trees, as smoothly and evenly as though an engineer had
planned it. The trail was a foot deep in the ground and smoothly worn
and we left it where it slanted down through a divide in the hills like
a dry irrigation ditch and climbed, sweating, the small, steep hill on
the right to sit there with our backs against the hilltop and glass the
country. It was a green, pleasant country, with hills below the forest
that grew thick on the side of a mountain, and it was cut by the valleys
of several watercourses that came down out of the thick timber on the
mountain. Fingers of the forest came down on to the head of some of the
slopes and it was there, at the forest edge, that we watched for rhino
to come out. If you looked away from the forest and the mountain side
you could follow the watercourses and the hilly slope of the land down
until the land flattened and the grass was brown and burned and, away,
across a long sweep of country, was the brown Rift Valley and the shine
of Lake Manyara.

We all lay there on the hillside and watched the country carefully for
rhino. Droopy was on the other side of the hilltop, squatted on his
heels, looking, and M'Cola sat below us. There was a cool breeze from
the east and it blew the grass in waves on the hillsides. There were
many large white clouds and the tall trees of the forest on the mountain
side grew so closely and were so foliaged that it looked as though you
could walk on their tops. Behind this mountain there was a gap and then
another mountain and the far mountain was dark blue with forest in the
distance.

Until five o'clock we did not see anything. Then, without the glasses, I
saw something moving over the shoulder of one of the valleys toward a
strip of the timber. In the glasses it was a rhino, showing very clear
and minute at the distance, red-coloured in the sun, moving with a quick
waterbug-like motion across the hill. Then there were three more of them
that came out of the forest, dark in the shadow, and two that fought,
tinily, in the glasses, pushing head-on, fighting in front of a clump of
bushes while we watched them and the light failed. It was too dark to
get down the hill, across the valley and up the narrow slope of mountain
side to them in time for a shot. So we went back to the camp, down the
hill in the dark, edging down on our shoes and then feeling the trail
smooth under foot, walking along that deep trail, that wound through the
dark hills, until we saw the firelight in the trees.

We were excited that night because we had seen the three rhino and early
the next morning while we were eating breakfast before starting out,
Droopy came in to report a herd of buffalo he had found feeding at the
edge of the forest not two miles from camp. We went there, still tasting
coffee and kippers in the early morning heart-pounding of excitement,
and the native Droopy had left watching them pointed where they had
crossed a deep gulch and gone into an open patch of forest. He said
there were two big bulls in a herd of a dozen or more. We followed them
in, moving very quietly on the game trails, pushing the vines aside and
seeing the tracks and the quantities of fresh dung, but though we went
on into the forest, where it was too thick to shoot and made a wide
circle, we did not see or hear them. Once we heard the tick birds and
saw them flying, but that was all. There were numbers of rhino trails
there in the woods and many strawy piles of dung, but we saw nothing but
the green wood-pigeons and some monkeys, and when we came out we were
wet to our waists from the dew, and the sun was quite high. The day was
very hot, now before the wind had gotten up, and we knew whatever rhino
and buffalo had been out would have gone back deep into the forest to
rest out of the heat.

The others started back to camp with Pop and M'Cola. There was no meat
in camp, and I wanted to hunt back in a circle with Droopy to see if we
could kill a piece. I was beginning to feel strong again after the
dysentery and it was a pleasure to walk in the easy rolling country,
simply to walk, and to be able to hunt, not knowing what we might see
and free to shoot for the meat we needed. Then, too, I liked Droopy and
liked to watch him walk. He strode very loosely and with a slight lift,
and I liked to watch him and to feel the grass under my soft-soled boots
and the pleasant weight of the rifle, held just back of the muzzle, the
barrel resting on my shoulder, and the sun hot enough to sweat you well
as it burned the dew from the grass; with the breeze starting and the
country like an abandoned New England orchard to walk through. I knew
that I was shooting well again and I wanted to make a shot to impress
Droopy.

From the top of one rise we saw two kongoni showing yellow on a hillside
about a mile away and I motioned to Droop that we would go after them.
We started down and in a ravine jumped a waterbuck bull and two cows.
Waterbuck was the one animal we might get that I knew was worthless as
meat and I had shot a better head than this one carried. I had the
sights on the buck as he tore away, remembered about the worthless
meat, and having the head, and did not shoot.

'No shoot kuro?' Droopy asked in Swahili. '_Doumi sana._ A good bull.'

I tried to tell him that I had a better one and that it was no good to
eat.

He grinned.

'_Piga kongoni m'uzuri._'

'Piga' was a fine word. It sounded exactly as the command to fire should
sound or the announcement of a hit. 'M'uzuri', meaning good, well,
better, had sounded too much like the name of a state for a long time,
and walking I used to make up sentences in Swahili with Arkansas and
M'usuri in them, but now it seemed natural, no longer to be italicized,
just as all the words came to seem the proper and natural words and
there was nothing odd or unseemly in the stretching of the ears, in the
tribal scars, or in a man carrying a spear. The tribal marks and the
tattooed places seemed natural and handsome adornments and I regretted
not having any of my own. My own scars were all informal, some irregular
and sprawling, others simply puffy welts. I had one on my forehead that
people still commented on, asking if I had bumped my head; but Droop had
handsome ones beside his cheekbones and others, symmetrical and
decorative, on his chest and belly. I was thinking that I had one good
one, a sort of embossed Christmas tree, on the bottom of my right foot
that only served to wear out socks, when we jumped two reedbuck. They
went off through the trees and then stood at sixty yards, the thin,
graceful buck looking back, and I shot him high and a touch behind the
shoulder. He gave a jump and went off very fast.

'Piga.' Droopy smiled. We had both heard the whunk of the bullet.

'Kufa,' I told him. 'Dead.'

But when we came up to him, lying on his side, his heart was still
beating strongly, although to all appearances he was dead. Droopy had no
skinning knife and I had only a penknife to stick him with. I felt for
the heart behind the foreleg with my fingers and feeling it beating
under the hide slipped the knife in but it was short and pushed the
heart away. I could feel it, hot and rubbery against my fingers, and
feel the knife push it, but I felt around and cut the big artery and the
blood came hot against my fingers. Once bled, I started to open him,
with the little knife, still showing off to Droopy, and emptying him
neatly took out the liver, cut away the gall, and laying the liver on a
hummock of grass, put the kidneys beside it.

Droopy asked for the knife. Now he was going to show me something.
Skilfully he slit open the stomach and turned it inside, tripe side,
out, emptying the grass in it on the ground, shook it, then put the
liver and kidneys inside it and with the knife cut a switch from the
tree the buck lay under and sewed the stomach together with the withe so
that the tripe made a bag to carry the other delicacies in. Then he cut
a pole and put the bag on the end of it, running it through the flaps,
and put it over his shoulder in the way tramps carried their property
in a handkerchief on the end of a stick in Blue Jay corn plaster
advertisements when we were children. It was a good trick and I thought
how I would show it to John Staib in Wyoming some time and he would
smile his deaf man's smile (you had to throw pebbles at him to make him
stop when you heard a bull bugle), and I knew what John would say. He
would say, 'By Godd, Urnust, dot's smardt'.

Droop handed me the stick, then took off his single garment, made a
sling and got the buck up on his back. I tried to help him and suggested
by signs that we cut a pole and sling him, carrying him between us, but
he wanted to carry him alone. So we started for camp, me with the tripe
bag on the end of a stick over my shoulder, my rifle slung, and Droopy
staggering steadily ahead, sweating heavily, under the buck. I tried to
get him to hang him in a tree and leave him until we could send out a
couple of porters, and to that end we put him in the crotch of a tree.
But when Droopy saw that I meant to go off and leave him there rather
than simply allow him to drain he got him down on to his shoulders again
and we went on into camp, the boys, around the cooking fire, all
laughing at the tripe bag over my shoulder as we came in.

This was the kind of hunting that I liked. No riding in cars, the
country broken up instead of the plains, and I was completely happy. I
had been quite ill and had that pleasant feeling of getting stronger
each day. I was underweight, had a great appetite for meat, and could
eat all I wanted without feeling stuffy. Each day I sweated out
whatever we drank sitting at the fire at night, and in the heat of the
day, now, I lay in the shade with a breeze in the trees and read with no
obligation and no compulsion to write, happy in knowing that at four
o'clock we would be starting out to hunt again. I would not even write a
letter. The only person I really cared about, except the children, was
with me, and I had no wish to share this life with anyone who was not
there, only to live it, being completely happy and quite tired. I knew
that I was shooting well and I had that feeling of well-being and
confidence that is so much more pleasant to have than to hear about.

As it turned out, we started soon after three to be on the hill by four.
But it was nearly five before we saw the first rhino come bustling
short-leggedly across the ridge of hill in almost the same place we had
seen the rhino the night before. We sat where he went into the edge of
the forest near where we had seen the two fighting and then took a
course that would lead us down the hill, across the grown-over gully at
the bottom, and up the steep slope to where there was a thorn tree with
yellow blossoms that marked the place where we had seen the rhino go in.

Coming straight up the slope in sight of the thorn tree, the wind
blowing across the hill, I tried to walk as slowly as I could and put a
handkerchief inside the sweatband of my hat to keep the perspiration out
of my glasses. I expected to shoot at any minute and I wanted to slow up
enough so my heart would not be pounding. In shooting large animals
there is no reason ever to miss if you have a clear shot and can shoot
and know where to shoot, unless you are unsteady from a run or a climb
or fog your glasses, break them or run out of cloth or paper to wipe
them clean. The glasses were the biggest hazard and I used to carry four
handkerchiefs and change them from the left to the right pocket when
they were wet.

We came up to the yellow blossomed tree very carefully, like people
walking up to a bevy of quail the dogs have pointed, and the rhino was
not in sight. We went all through the edge of the forest and it was full
of tracks and fresh rhino sign, but there was no rhino. The sun was
setting and it was getting too dark to shoot, but we followed the forest
around the side of the mountain, hoping to see a rhino in the open
glades. When it was almost too dark to shoot, I saw Droopy stop and
crouch. With his head down he motioned us forward. Crawling up, we saw a
large rhino and a small one standing chest deep in brush, facing us
across a little valley.

'Cow and calf,' Pop said softly. 'Can't shoot her. Let me look at her
horn.' He took the glasses from M'Cola.

'Can she see us?' P.O.M. asked.

'No.'

'How far are they?'

'Must be nearly five hundred yards.'

'My God, she looks big,' I whispered.

'She's a big cow,' Pop said. 'Wonder what became of the bull?' He was
pleased and excited by the sight of game. 'Too dark to shoot unless
we're right on him.'

The rhinos had turned and were feeding. They never seemed to move
slowly. They either bustled or stood still.

'What makes them so red?' P.O.M. asked.

'Rolling in the mud,' Pop answered. 'We better get along while there's
light.'

The sun was down when we came out of the forest and looked down the
slope and across to the hill where we had watched from with our glasses.
We should have back-tracked and gone down, crossed the gulch, and
climbed back up the trail the way we had come, but we decided, like
fools, to grade straight across the mountainside below the edge of the
forest. So in the dark, following this ideal line, we descended into
steep ravines that showed only as wooded patches until you were in them,
slid down, clung to vines, stumbled and climbed and slid again, down and
down, then steeply, impossibly, up, hearing the rustle of night things
and the cough of a leopard hunting baboons; me scared of snakes, and
touching each root and branch with snake fear in the dark.

To go down and up two hands-and-knee climbing ravines and then out into
the moonlight and the long, too-steep shoulder of mountain that you
climbed one foot up to the other, one foot after the other, one stride
at a time, leaning forward against the grade and the altitude, dead
tired and gun weary, single file in the moonlight across the slope, on
up and to the top where it was easy, the country spread in the
moonlight, then up and down and on, through the small hills, tired but
now in sight of the fires and on into camp.

So then you sit, bundled against the evening chill, at the fire, with a
whisky and soda, waiting for the announcement that the canvas bath had
been a quarter filled with hot water.

'_Bathi_, B'wana.'

'Goddamn it, I could never hunt sheep again,' you say.

'I never could,' says P.O.M. 'You all made me.'

'You climbed better than any of us.'

'Do you suppose we could hunt sheep again, Pop?'

'I wonder,' Pop said. 'I suppose it's merely condition.'

'It's riding in the damned cars that ruins us.'

'If we did that walk every night we could come back in three nights from
now and never feel it.'

'Yes. But I'd be as scared of snakes if we did it every night for a
year.'

'You'd get over it.'

'No,' I said. 'They scare me stiff. Do you remember that time we touched
hands behind the tree?'

'Rather,' said Pop. 'You jumped two yards. Are you really afraid of
them, or only talking?'

'They scare me sick,' I said. 'They always have.'

'What's the matter with you men?' P.O.M. said. 'Why haven't I heard
anything about the war to-night?'

'We're too tired. Were you in the war, Pop?'

'Not me,' said Pop. 'Where is that boy with the whisky?' Then calling in
that feeble, clowning falsetto, 'Kayti . . . Katy-ay!'

'_Bathi_,' said Molo again softly, but insistently.

'Too tired.'

'Memsahib _bathi_,' Molo said hopefully.

'I'll go,' said P.O.M. 'But you two hurry up with your drinking. I'm
hungry.'

'_Bathi_,' said Kayti severely to Pop.

'_Bathi_ yourself,' said Pop. 'Don't bully me.'

Kayti turned away in fire-lit slanting smile.

'All right. All right,' said Pop. 'Going to have one?' he asked.

'We'll have just one,' I said, 'and then we'll _bathi_.'

'_Bathi_, B'wana M'Kumba,' Molo said. P.O.M. came toward the fire
wearing her blue dressing-gown and mosquito boots.

'Go on,' she said. 'You can have another when you come out. There's
nice, warm, muddy water.'

'They bully us,' Pop said.

'Do you remember the time we were sheep hunting and your hat blew off
and nearly fell on to the ram?' I asked her, the whisky racing my mind
back to Wyoming.

'Go take your _bathi_,' P.O.M. said. 'I'm going to have a gimlet.'

In the morning we were dressed before daylight, ate breakfast, and were
hunting the forest edge and the sunken valleys where Droop had seen the
buffalo before the sun was up. But they were not there. It was a long
hunt and we came back to camp and decided to send the lorries for
porters and move with a foot safari to where there was supposed to be
water in a stream that came down out of the mountain beyond where we had
seen the rhinos the night before. Being camped there we could hunt a
new country along the forest edge and we would be much closer to the
mountain.

The trucks were to bring in Karl from his kudu camp where he seemed to
be getting disgusted, or discouraged, or both, and he could go down to
the Rift Valley the next day and kill some meat and try for an oryx. If
we found good rhino we would send for him. We did not want to fire any
shots where we were going except at rhino in order not to scare them,
and we needed meat. The rhino seemed very shy and I knew from Wyoming
how the shy game will all shift out of a small country, a country being
an area, a valley or range of hills, a man can hunt in, after a shot or
two. We planned this all out, Pop consulting with Droopy, and then sent
the lorries off with Dan to recruit porters.

Late in the afternoon they were back with Karl, his outfit, and forty
M'Bulus, good-looking savages with a pompous headman who wore the only
pair of shorts among them. Karl was thin now, his skin sallow, his eyes
very tired looking and he seemed a little desperate. He had been eight
days in the kudu camp in the hills, hunting hard, with no one with him
who spoke any English, and they had only seen two cows and jumped a bull
out of range. The guides claimed they had seen another bull but Karl had
thought it was kongoni, or that they said it was a kongoni, and had not
shot. He was bitter about this and it was not a happy outfit.

'I never saw his horns. I don't believe it was a bull,' he said. Kudu
hunting was a touchy subject with him now and we let it alone.

'He'll get an oryx down there and he'll feel better,' Pop said. 'It's
gotten on his nerves a little.'

Karl agreed to the plan for us to move ahead into the new country, and
for him to go down for meat.

'Whatever you say,' he said. 'Absolutely whatever you say.'

'It will give him some shooting,' Pop said. 'Then he'll feel better.'

'We'll get one. Then you get one. Whoever gets his first can go on down
after oryx. You'll probably get an oryx to-morrow anyway when you're
hunting meat.'

'Whatever you say,' Karl said. His mind was bitterly revolving eight
blank days of hill climbing in the heat, out before daybreak, back at
dark, hunting an animal whose Swahili name he could not then remember,
with trackers in whom he had no confidence, coming back to eat alone, no
one to whom he could talk, his wife nine thousand miles and three months
away, and how was his dog and how was his job, and god-damn it where
were they and what if he missed one when he got a shot, he wouldn't, you
never missed when it was really important, he was sure of that, that was
one of the tenets of his faith, but what if he got excited and missed,
and why didn't he get any letters, what did the guide say kongoni for
that time, they did, he knew they did, but he said nothing of all that,
only, 'Whatever you say', a little desperately.

'Come on, cheer up, you bastard,' I said.

'I'm cheerful. What's the matter with you?'

'Have a drink.'

'I don't want a drink. I want a kudu.'

Later Pop said, 'I thought he'd do well off by himself with no one to
hurry him or rattle him. He'll be all right. He's a good lad.'

'He wants someone to tell him exactly what to do and still leave him
alone and not rattle him,' I said. 'It's hell for him to shoot in front
of everybody. He's not a damned show-off like me.'

'He made a damned fine shot at that leopard,' Pop said.

'Two of them,' I said. 'The second was as good as the first. Hell, he
can shoot. On the range he'll shoot the pants off of any of us. But he
worries about it and I rattle him trying to get him to speed up.'

'You're a little hard on him sometimes,' Pop said.

'Hell, he knows me. He knows what I think of him. He doesn't mind.'

'I still think he'll find himself off by himself,' Pop said. 'It's just
a question of confidence. He's really a good shot.'

'He's got the best buff, the best waterbuck, and the best lion, now,' I
said. 'He's got nothing to worry about.'

'The Memsahib has the best lion, brother. Don't make any mistake about
that.'

'I'm glad of that. But he's got a damned fine lion and a big leopard.
Everything he has is good. We've got plenty of time. He's got nothing to
worry about. What the hell is he so gloomy about?'

'We'll get an early start in the morning so we can finish it off before
it gets too hot for the little Memsahib.'

'She's in the best shape of any one.'

'She's marvellous. She's like a little terrier.'

We went out that afternoon and glassed the country from the hills and
never saw a thing. That night after supper we were in the tent. P.O.M.
disliked intensely being compared to a little terrier. If she must be
like any dog, and she did not wish to be, she would prefer a wolfhound,
something lean, racy, long-legged and ornamental. Her courage was so
automatic and so much a simple state of being that she never thought of
danger; then, too, danger was in the hands of Pop and for Pop she had a
complete, clear-seeing, absolutely trusting adoration. Pop was her ideal
of how a man should be, brave, gentle, comic, never losing his temper,
never bragging, never complaining except in a joke, tolerant,
understanding, intelligent, drinking a little too much as a good man
should, and, to her eyes, very handsome.

'Don't you think Pop's handsome?'

'No,' I said. 'Droopy's handsome.'

'Droopy's _beautiful_. But don't you _really_ think Pop's handsome?'

'Hell, no. I like him as well as any man I've ever known, but I'm damned
if he's handsome.'

'I think he's lovely looking. But you understand about how I feel about
him, don't you?'

'Sure. I'm as fond of the bastard myself.'

'But _don't_ you think he's handsome, really?'

'Nope.'

Then, a little later:

'Well, who's handsome to you?'

'Belmonte and Pop. And you.'

'Don't be patriotic,' I said. 'Who's a beautiful woman?'

'Garbo.'

'Not any more. Josie is. Margot is.'

'Yes, they are. I know I'm not.'

'You're lovely.'

'Let's talk about Mr. J. P. I don't like you to call him Pop. It's not
dignified.'

'He and I aren't dignified together.'

'Yes, but I'm dignified with him. Don't you think he's wonderful?'

'Yes, and he doesn't have to read books written by some female he's
tried to help get published saying how he's yellow.'

'She's just jealous and malicious. You never should have helped her.
Some people never forgive that.'

'It's a shame, though, with all that talent gone to malice and nonsense
and self-praise. It's a goddamned shame, really. It's a shame you never
knew her before she went to pot. You know a funny thing; she never could
write dialogue. It was terrible. She learned how to do it from my stuff
and used it in that book. She had never written like that before. She
never could forgive learning that and she was afraid people would notice
it, where she'd learned it, so she had to attack me. It's a funny
racket, really. But I swear she was nice before she got ambitious. You
would have liked her then, really.'

'Maybe, but I don't think so,' said P.O.M. 'We have fun though, don't
we? Without all those people.'

'God damn it if we don't. I've had a better time every year since I can
remember.'

'But isn't Mr. J. P. wonderful? Really?'

'Yes. He's wonderful.'

'Oh, you're nice to say it. Poor Karl.'

'Why?'

'Without his wife.'

'Yes,' I said. 'Poor Karl.'




CHAPTER TWO


So in the morning, again, we started ahead of the porters and went down
and across the hills and through a deeply forested valley and then up
and across a long rise of country with high grass that made the walking
difficult, and on and up and across, resting sometimes in the shade of a
tree, and then on and up and down and across, all in high grass now,
that you had to break a trail in, and the sun was very hot. The five of
us in single file, Droop and M'Cola with a big gun apiece, hung with
musettes and water bottles and the cameras, we all sweating in the sun,
Pop and I with guns and the Memsahib trying to walk like Droopy, her
Stetson tilted on one side, happy to be on a trip, pleased about how
comfortable her boots were, we came finally to a thicket of thorn trees
over a ravine that ran down from the side of a ridge to the water and we
leaned the guns against the trees and went in under the close shade and
lay on the ground. P.O.M. got the books out of one of the musettes and
she and Pop read while I followed the ravine down to the little stream
that came out of the mountainside, and found a fresh lion track and many
rhino tunnels in the tall grass that came higher than your head. It was
very hot climbing back up the sandy ravine and I was glad to lean my
back against the tree trunk and read in Tolstoy's _Sevastopol_. It was
a very young book and had one fine description of fighting in it, where
the French take the redoubt, and I thought about Tolstoy and about what
a great advantage an experience of war was to a writer. It was one of
the major subjects and certainly one of the hardest to write truly of,
and those writers who had not seen it were always very jealous and tried
to make it seem unimportant, or abnormal, or a disease as a subject,
while, really, it was just something quite irreplaceable that they had
missed. Then Sevastopol made me think of the Boulevard Sevastopol in
Paris, about riding a bicycle down it in the rain on the way home from
Strassburg and the slipperiness of the rails of the tram cars and the
feeling of riding on greasy, slippery asphalt and cobble stones in
traffic in the rain, and how we had nearly lived on the Boulevard du
Temple that time, and I remembered the look of that apartment, how it
was arranged, and the wall paper, and instead we had taken the upstairs
of the pavilion in Notre Dame des Champs in the courtyard with the
sawmill (_and the sudden whine of the saw, the smell of sawdust and the
chestnut tree over the roof with a mad woman downstairs_), and the year
worrying about money (_all of the stories back in the post that came in
through a slit in the saw-mill door, with notes of rejection that would
never call them stories, but always anecdotes, sketches, contes, etc.
They did not want them, and we lived on poireaux and drank cahors and
water_), and how fine the fountains were at the Place de L'Observatoire
(_water sheen rippling on the bronze of horses' manes, bronze breasts
and shoulders, green under thin-flowing water_), and when they put up
the bust of Flaubert in the Luxembourg on the short cut through the
gardens on the way to the rue Soufflot (_one that we believed in, loved
without criticism, heavy now in stone as an idol should be_). He had not
seen war but he had seen a revolution and the Commune, and a revolution
is much the best if you do not become bigoted because every one speaks
the same language. Just as civil war is the best war for a writer, the
most complete. Stendhal had seen a war and Napoleon taught him to write.
He was teaching everybody then; but no one else learned. Dostoevski was
made by being sent to Siberia. Writers are forged in injustice as a
sword is forged. I wondered if it would make a writer of him, give him
the necessary shock to cut the over-flow of words and give him a sense
of proportion, if they sent Tom Wolfe to Siberia or to the Dry Tortugas.
Maybe it would and maybe it wouldn't. He seemed sad, really, like
Carnera. Tolstoy was a small man. Joyce was of medium height and he wore
his eyes out. And that last night, drunk, with Joyce and the thing he
kept quoting from Edgar Quinet, 'Fraîche et rose comme au jour de la
bataille'. I didn't have it right I knew. And when you saw him he would
take up a conversation interrupted three years before. It was nice to
see a great writer in our time.

What I had to do was work. I did not care, particularly, how it all came
out. I did not take my own life seriously any more, any one else's life,
yes, but not mine. They all wanted something that I did not want and I
would get it without wanting it, if I worked. To work was the only
thing, it was the one thing that always made you feel good, and in the
meantime it was my own damned life and I would lead it where and how I
pleased. And where I had led it now pleased me very much. This was a
better sky than Italy. The hell it was. The best sky was in Italy and
Spain and Northern Michigan in the fall and in the fall in the Gulf off
Cuba. You could beat this sky; but not the country.

All I wanted to do now was get back to Africa. We had not left it, yet,
but when I would wake in the night I would lie, listening, homesick for
it already.

Now, looking out the tunnel of trees over the ravine at the sky with
white clouds moving across in the wind, I loved the country so that I
was happy as you are after you have been with a woman that you really
love, when, empty, you feel it welling up again and there it is and you
can never have it all and yet what there is, now, you can have, and you
want more and more, to have, and be, and live in, to possess now again
for always, for that long, sudden-ended always; making time stand still,
sometimes so very still that afterwards you wait to hear it move, and it
is slow in starting. But you are not alone, because if you have ever
really loved her happy and untragic, she loves you always; no matter
whom she loves nor where she goes she loves you more. So if you have
loved some woman and some country you are very fortunate and, if you die
afterwards, it makes no difference. Now, being in Africa, I was hungry
for more of it, the changes of the seasons, the rains with no need to
travel, the discomforts that you paid to make it real, the names of the
trees, of the small animals, and all the birds, to know the language
and have time to be in it and to move slowly. I have loved country all
my life; the country was always better than the people. I could only
care about people a very few at a time.

P.O.M. was sleeping. She was always lovely to look at asleep, sleeping
quietly, close curled like an animal, with nothing of the being dead
look that Karl had asleep. Pop slept quietly too, you could see his soul
was close in his body. His body no longer housed him fittingly. It had
gone on and changed, thickening here, losing its lines, bloating a
little there, but inside he was young and lean and tall and hard as when
he galloped lion on the plain below Wami, and the pouches under his eyes
were all outside, so that now I saw him asleep the way P.O.M. saw him
always. M'Cola was an old man asleep, without history and without
mystery. Droopy did not sleep. He sat on his heels and watched for the
safari.

We saw them coming a long way off. At first the boxes just showed above
the high grass, then a line of heads, then they were in a hollow, and
there was only the point of a spear in the sun, then they came up a rise
of ground and I could see the strung out line coming towards us. They
had gone a little too far to the left and Droopy waved to signal them
toward us. They made camp, Pop warning them to be quiet, and we sat
under the dining tent and were comfortable in the chairs and talked.
That night we hunted and saw nothing. The next morning we hunted and saw
nothing and the next evening the same. It was very interesting but there
were no results. The wind blew hard from the east and the ground was
broken in short ridges of hills coming down close from the forest so you
could not get above it without sending your scent on ahead of you on the
wind to warn everything. You could not see into the sun in the evening,
nor on the heavy shadowed hillsides to the west, beyond which the sun
was setting at the time the rhino would be coming out of the forest; so
all the country to the westward was a loss in the evening and in the
country we could hunt we found nothing. Meat came in from Karl's camp by
some porters we sent back. They came in carrying quarters of tommy,
grant, and wildebeeste, dusty, the meat seared dry by the sun, and the
porters were happy, crouched around their fires roasting the meat on
sticks. Pop was puzzled why the rhino were all gone. Each day we had
seen less and we discussed whether it could be the full moon, that they
fed out at night and were back in the forest in the morning before it
was light, or that they winded us, or heard the men, and were simply shy
and kept in the forest, or what was it? Me putting out the theories, Pop
pricking them with his wit, sometimes considering them from politeness,
sometimes with interest, like the one about the moon.

We went to bed early and in the night it rained a little, not a real
rain but a shower from the mountains, and in the morning we were up
before daylight and had climbed up to the top of the steep grassy ridge
that looked down on to the camp, on to the ravine of the river bed, and
across to the steep opposite bank of the stream, and from where we could
see all the hilly slopes and the edge of the forest. It was not yet
light when some geese flew overhead and the light was still too grey to
be able to see the edge of the forest clearly in the glasses. We had
scouts out on three different hill tops and we were waiting for it to be
light enough for us to see them if they signalled.

Then Pop said, 'Look at that son of a bitch', and shouted at M'Cola to
bring the rifles. M'Cola went jumping down the hill, and across the
stream, directly opposite us, a rhino was running with a quick trot
along the top of the bank. As we watched he speeded up and came, fast
trotting, angling down across the face of the bank. He was a muddy red,
his horn showed clearly, and there was nothing ponderous in his quick,
purposeful movement. I was very excited at seeing him.

'He'll cross the stream,' Pop said. 'He's shootable.'

M'Cola put the Springfield in my hand and I opened it to make sure I had
solids. The Rhino was out of sight now but I could see the shaking of
the high grass.

'How far would you call it?'

'All of three hundred.'

'I'll bust the son of a bitch.'

I was watching, freezing myself deliberately inside, stopping the
excitement as you close a valve, going into that impersonal state you
shoot from.

He showed, trotting into the shallow, boulder-filled stream. Thinking of
one thing, that the shot was perfectly possible, but that I must lead
him enough, must get ahead, I got on him, then well ahead of him, and
squeezed off. I heard the _whonk_ of the bullet and, from his trot, he
seemed to explode forward. With a whooshing snort he smashed ahead,
splashing water and snorting. I shot again and raised a little column of
water behind him, and shot again as he went into the grass; behind him
again.

'Piga,' M'Cola said. 'Piga!'

Droopy agreed.

'Did you hit him?' Pop said.

'Absolutely,' I said. 'I think I've got him.'

Droopy was running and I re-loaded and ran off after him. Half the camp
was strung out across the hills waving and yelling. The rhino had come
in right below where they were and gone on up the valley towards where
the forest came close down into the head of the valley.

Pop and P.O.M. came up. Pop with his big gun and M'Cola carrying mine.

'Droopy will get the tracks,' Pop said. 'M'Cola swears you hit him.'

'Piga!' M'Cola said.

'He snorted like a steam engine,' P.O.M. said. 'Didn't he look wonderful
going along there?'

'He was late getting home with the milk,' Pop said. 'Are you _sure_ you
hit him? It was a godawful long shot.'

'I _know_ I hit him. I'm _pretty_ sure I've killed him.'

'Don't tell any one if you did,' Pop said. 'They'll never believe you.
Look! Droopy's got blood.'

Below, in the high grass, Droop was holding up a grass blade towards us.
Then, stooped, he went on trailing fast by the blood spoor.

'Piga,' M'Cola said. 'M'uzuri!'

'We'll keep up above where we can see if he makes a break,' Pop said.
'Look at Droopy.'

Droop had removed his fez and held it in his hand.

'That's all the precautions he needs,' Pop said. 'We bring up a couple
of heavy guns and Droopy goes in after him with one article less of
clothing.'

Below us Droopy and his partner who was trailing with him had stopped.
Droopy held up his hand.

'They hear him,' Pop said. 'Come on.'

We started toward them. Droopy came toward us and spoke to Pop.

'He's in there,' Pop whispered. 'They can hear the tick birds. One of
the boys says he heard the faro, too. We'll go in against the wind. You
go ahead with Droopy. Let the Memsahib stay behind me. Take the big gun.
All right.'

The rhino was in high grass, somewhere in there behind some bushes. As
we went forward we heard a deep, moaning sort of groan. Droopy looked
around at me and grinned. The noise came again, ending this time like a
blood-choked sigh. Droopy was laughing. 'Faro,' he whispered and put his
hand palm open on the side of his head in the gesture that means to go
to sleep. Then in a jerky-flighted, sharp-beaked little flock we saw the
tick birds rise and fly away. We knew where he was and, as we went
slowly forward, parting the high grass, we saw him. He was on his side,
dead.

'Better shoot him once to make sure,' Pop said. M'Cola handed me the
Springfield he had been carrying. I noticed it was cocked, looked at
M'Cola, furious with him, kneeled down and shot the rhino in the
sticking place. He never moved. Droopy shook my hand and so did M'Cola.

'He had that damned Springfield cocked,' I said to Pop. The cocked gun,
behind my back, made me black angry.

That meant nothing to M'Cola. He was very happy, stroking the rhino's
horn, measuring it with his fingers spread, looking for the bullet hole.

'It's on the side he's lying on,' I said.

'You should have seen him when he was protecting Mama,' Pop said.
'That's why he had the gun cocked.'

'Can he shoot?'

'No,' Pop said. 'But he would.'

'Shoot me in the pants,' I said. 'Romantic bastard.' When the whole
outfit came up, we rolled the rhino into a sort of kneeling position and
cut away the grass to take some pictures. The bullet hole was fairly
high in the back, a little behind the lungs.

'That was a hell of a shot,' Pop said. 'A hell of a shot. Don't ever
tell any one you made that one.'

'You'll have to give me a certificate.'

'That would just make us both liars. They're a strange beast, aren't
they?'

There he was, long-hulked, heavy-sided, prehistoric looking, the hide
like vulcanized rubber and faintly transparent looking, scarred with a
badly healed horn wound that the birds had pecked at, his tail thick,
round, and pointed, flat many-legged ticks crawling on him, his ears
fringed with hair, tiny pig eyes, moss growing on the base of his horn
that grew out forward from his nose. M'Cola looked at him and shook his
head. I agreed with him. This was the hell of an animal.

'How is his horn?'

'It isn't bad,' Pop said. 'It's nothing extra. That was a hell of a shot
you made on him though, brother.'

'M'Cola's pleased with it,' I said.

'You're pretty pleased with it yourself,' P.O.M. said.

'I'm crazy about it,' I said. 'But don't let me start on it. Don't worry
about how I feel about it. I can wake up and think about that any
night.'

'And you're a good tracker, and a hell of a fine bird shot, too,' Pop
said. 'Tell us the rest of that.'

'Lay off me. I only said that once when I was drunk.'

'Once,' said P.O.M. 'Doesn't he tell us that every night?'

'By God, I _am_ a good bird shot.'

'Amazing,' said Pop. 'I never would have thought it. What else is it you
do?'

'Oh, go to hell.'

'Mustn't ever let him realize what a shot that was or he'll get
unbearable,' Pop said to P.O.M.

'M'Cola and I know,' I said.

M'Cola came up. 'M'uzuri, B'wana,' he said. 'M'uzuri sana.'

'He thinks you did it on purpose,' Pop said.

'Don't you ever tell him different.'

'Piga m'uzuri,' M'Cola said. 'M'uzuri.'

'I believe he feels just the way you do about it,' Pop said.

'He's my pal.'

'I believe he is, you know,' Pop said.

On our way back across country to our main camp I made a fancy shot on a
reedbuck at about two hundred yards, offhand, breaking his neck at the
base of the skull. M'Cola was very pleased and Droopy was delighted.

'We've got to put a stop to him,' Pop said to P.O.M. 'Where did you
shoot for, really?'

'In the neck,' I lied. I had held full on the centre of the shoulder.

'It was awfully pretty,' P.O.M. said. The bullet had made a crack when
it hit like a bat swung against a fast ball and the buck had collapsed
without a move.

'I think he's a damned liar,' Pop said.

'None of us great shots is appreciated. Wait till we're gone.'

'His idea of being appreciated is for us to carry him on our shoulders,'
Pop said. 'That rhino shot has ruined him.'

'All right. You watch from now on. Hell, I've shot well the whole time.'

'I seem to remember a grant of some sort,' Pop was teasing. So did I
remember him. I'd followed a fine one out of the country missing shot
after shot all morning after a series of stalks in the heat, then
crawled up to an ant hill to shoot one that was not nearly as good,
taken a rest on the ant hill, missed the buck at fifty yards, seen him
stand facing me, absolutely still, his nose up, and shot him in the
chest. He went over backwards and as I went up to him he jumped up and
went off, staggering. I sat down and waited for him to stop and when he
did, obviously anchored, I sat there, using the sling, and shot for his
neck, slowly and carefully, missing him eight times straight in a
mounting, stubborn rage, not making a correction but shooting exactly
for the same place in the same way each time, the gun bearers all
laughing, the truck that had come up with the outfit holding more amused
niggers, P.O.M. and Pop saying nothing, me sitting there cold,
crazy-stubborn-furious, determined to break his neck rather than walk up
and perhaps start him off over that heat-hazy, baking, noontime plain.
Nobody said anything. I reached up my hand to M'Cola for more
cartridges, shot again, carefully, and missed, and on the tenth shot
broke his damned neck. I turned away without looking toward him.

'Poor Papa,' P.O.M. said.

'It's the light and the wind,' Pop said. We had not known each other
very well then. 'They were all hitting the same place. I could see them
throw the dust.'

'I was a bloody, stubborn fool,' I said.

Anyway, I could shoot now. So far, and aided by flukes, my luck was
running now.

We came on into sight of camp and shouted. No one came out. Finally Karl
came out of his tent. He went back as soon as he saw us, then came out
again.

'Hey, Karl,' I yelled. He waved and went back in the tent again. Then
came toward us. He was shaky with excitement and I saw he had been
washing blood off his hands.

'What is it?'

'Rhino,' he said.

'Did you get in trouble with him?'

'No. We killed him.'

'Fine. Where is he?'

'Over there behind that tree.'

We went over. There was the newly severed head of a rhino that was a
rhino. He was twice the size of the one I had killed. The little eyes
were shut and a fresh drop of blood stood in the corner of one like a
tear. The head bulked enormous and the horn swept up and back in a fine
curve. The hide was an inch thick where it hung in a cape behind the
head and was as white where it was cut as freshly sliced coco-nut.

'What is he? About thirty inches?'

'Hell, no,' said Pop. 'Not thirty inches.'

'But he iss a very fine one, Mr. Jackson,' Dan said.

'Yes. He's a fine one,' Pop said.

'Where did you get him?'

'Just outside of camp.'

'He wass standing in some bush. We heard him grunt.'

'We thought he was a buffalo,' Karl said.

'He iss a very fine one,' Dan repeated.

'I'm damned glad you got him,' I said.

There we were, the three of us, wanting to congratulate, waiting to be
good sports about this rhino whose smaller horn was longer than our big
one, this huge, tear-eyed marvel of a rhino, this dead, head-severed
dream rhino, and instead we all spoke like people who were about to
become seasick on a boat, or people who had suffered some heavy
financial loss. We were ashamed and could do nothing about it. I wanted
to say something pleasant and hearty, instead, 'How many times did you
shoot him?' I asked.

'I don't know. We didn't count. Five or six, I guess.'

'Five, I think,' said Dan.

Poor Karl, faced by these three sad-faced congratulators, was beginning
to feel his pleasure in the rhino drained away from him.

'We got one too,' said P.O.M.

'That's fine,' said Karl. 'Is he bigger than this one?'

'Hell, no. He's a lousy runt.'

'I'm sorry,' Karl said. He meant it, simply and truly.

'What the hell have you got to be sorry about with a rhino like that?
He's a beauty. Let me get the camera and take some pictures of him.'

I went after the camera. P.O.M. took me by the arm and walked close
beside me.

'Papa, please try to act like a human being,' she said. 'Poor Karl.
You're making him feel dreadfully.'

'I know it,' I said. 'I'm trying not to act that way.'

There was Pop. He shook his head. 'I never felt more of a four-letter
man,' he said. 'But it was like a kick in the stomach. I'm really
delighted, of course.'

'Me too,' I said. 'I'd rather have him beat me. You know that. Truly.
But why couldn't he just get a good one, two or three inches longer? Why
did he have to get one that makes mine ridiculous? It just makes ours
silly.'

'You can always remember that shot.'

'To hell with that shot. That bloody fluke. God, what a beautiful
rhino.'

'Come on, let's pull ourselves together and try to act like white people
with him.'

'We were _awful_,' P.O.M. said.

'I know it,' I said. 'And all the time I was trying to be jolly. You
_know_ I'm delighted he has it.'

'You were certainly jolly. Both of you,' P.O.M. said.

'But did you see M'Cola,' Pop asked. M'Cola had looked at the rhino
dismally, shaken his head and walked away.

'He's a wonderful rhino,' P.O.M. said. 'We must act decently and make
Karl feel good.'

But it was too late. We could not make Karl feel good and for a long
time we could not feel good ourselves. The porters came into camp with
the loads and we could see them all, and all of our outfit, go over to
where the rhino head lay in the shade. They were all very quiet. Only
the skinner was delighted to see such a rhino head in camp.

'M'uzuri sana,' he said to me. And measured the horn with shiftings of
his widespread hand. 'Kubwa sana!'

'N'Dio. M'uzuri sana,' I agreed.

'B'wana Kabor shoot him?'

'Yes.'

'M'uzuri sana.'

'Yes,' I agreed. 'M'uzuri sana.'

The skinner was the only gent in the outfit. We had tried, in all the
shoot, never to be competitive. Karl and I had each tried to give the other
the better chance on everything that came up. I was, truly, very fond of
him and he was entirely unselfish and altogether self-sacrificing. I
knew I could outshoot him and I could always outwalk him and, steadily,
he got trophies that made mine dwarfs in comparison. He had done some of
the worst shooting at game I had ever seen and I had shot badly twice on
the trip, at that grant and at a bustard once on the plain, still he
beat me on all the tangible things we had to show. For a while we had
joked about it and I knew everything would even up. But it didn't even
up. Now, on this rhino hunt, I had taken the first crack at the country.
We had sent him after meat while we had gone into a new country. We had
not treated him badly, but we had not treated him too well, and still he
had beaten me. Not only beaten, beaten was all right. He had made my
rhino look so small that I could never keep him in the same small town
where we lived. He had wiped him out. I had the shot I had made on him
to remember and nothing could take that away except that it was so
bloody marvellous I knew I would wonder, sooner or later, if it was not
really a fluke in spite of my unholy self-confidence. Old Karl had put
it on us all right with that rhino. He was in his tent now, writing a
letter.

Under the dining tent fly Pop and I talked over what we had better do.

'He's got his rhino anyway,' Pop said. 'That saves us time. Now you
can't stand on that one.'

'No.'

'But this country is washed out. Something wrong with it. Droopy claims
to know a good country about three hours from here in the lorries and
another hour or so on with the porters. We can head for there this
afternoon with a light outfit, send the lorries back, and Karl and Dan
can move on down to M'uto Umbu and he can get his oryx.'

'Fine.'

'He has a chance to get a leopard on that rhino carcass this evening,
too, or in the morning. Dan said they heard one. We'll try to get a
rhino out of this country of Droopy's and then you join up with them and
go on for kudu. We want to leave plenty of time for them.'

'Fine.'

'Even if you don't get an oryx. You'll pick one up somewhere.'

'Even if I don't get one at all, it's all right. We'll get one another
time. I want a kudu, though.'

'You'll get one. You're sure to.'

'I'd rather get one, a good one, than all the rest. I don't give a damn
about these rhino outside of the fun of hunting them. But I'd like to
get one that wouldn't look silly beside that dream rhino of his.'

'Absolutely.'

So we told Karl and he said: 'Whatever you say. Sure. I hope you get one
twice as big.' He really meant it. He was feeling better now and so were
we all.




CHAPTER THREE


Droopy's country, when we reached it that evening, after a hot ride
through red-soiled, bush-scrubby hills, looked awful. It was at the edge
of a belt where all the trees had been girdled to kill the tsetse flies.
And across from camp was a dusty, dirty native village. The soil was red
and eroded and seemed to be blowing away, and camp was pitched in a high
wind under the sketchy shade of some dead trees on a hillside
overlooking a little stream and the mud village beyond. Before dark we
followed Droopy and two local guides up past the village and in a long
climb to the top of a rock-strewn ridge that overlooked a deep valley
that was almost a canyon. Across on the other side, were broken valleys
that sloped steeply down into the canyon. There were heavy growths of
trees in the valleys and grassy slopes on the ridges between, and above
there was the thick bamboo forest of the mountain. The canyon ran down
to the Rift Valley, seeming to narrow at the far end where it cut
through the wall of the rift. Beyond, above the grassy ridges and
slopes, were heavily forested hills. It looked a hell of a country to
hunt.

'If you see one across there you have to go straight down to the bottom
of the canyon. Then up one of those timber patches and across those
damned gullies. You can't keep him in sight and you'll kill yourself
climbing. It's too steep. Those are the kind of innocent-looking gullies
we got into that night coming home.'

'It looks very bad,' Pop agreed.

'I've hunted a country just like this for deer. The south slope of
Timber Creek in Wyoming. The slopes are all too steep. It's hell. It's
too broken. We'll take some punishment to-morrow.'

P.O.M. said nothing. Pop had brought us here and Pop would bring us out.
All she had to do was see her boots did not hurt her feet. They hurt
just a little now, and that was her only worry.

I went on to dilate on the difficulties the country showed and we went
home to camp in the dark all very gloomy and full of prejudice against
Droopy. The fire flamed brightly in the wind and we sat and watched the
moon rise and listened to the hyenas. After we had a few drinks we did
not feel so badly about the country.

'Droopy swears it's good,' Pop said. 'This isn't where he wanted to go
though, he says. It was another place farther on. But he swears this is
good.'

'I love Droopy,' P.O.M. said. 'I have perfect confidence in Droopy.'

Droopy came up to the fire with two spear-carrying natives.

'What does he hear?' I asked.

There was some talk by the natives, then Pop said: 'One of these
sportsmen claims he was chased by a huge rhino to-day. Of course nearly
any rhino would look huge when he was chasing him.'

'Ask him how long the horn was.'

The native showed that the horn was as long as his arm. Droopy grinned.

'Tell him to go,' said Pop.

'Where did all this happen?'

'Oh, over there somewhere,' Pop said. 'You know. Over there. Way over
there. Where these things always happen.'

'That's marvellous. Just where we want to go.'

'The good aspect is that Droopy's not at all depressed,' Pop said. 'He
seems very confident. After all, it's his show.'

'Yes, but we have to do the climbing.'

'Cheer him up, will you?' Pop said to P.O.M. 'He's getting me very
depressed.'

'Should we talk about how well he shoots?'

'Too early in the evening. I'm not gloomy. I've just seen that kind of
country before. It will be good for us all right. Take some of your
belly off, Governor.'

The next day I found that I was all wrong about that country.

       *       *       *       *       *

We had breakfast before daylight and were started before sunrise,
climbing the hill beyond the village in single file. Ahead there was the
local guide with a spear, then Droopy with my heavy gun and a water
bottle, then me with the Springfield, Pop with the Mannlicher, P.O.M.
pleased, as always to carry nothing, M'Cola with Pop's heavy gun and
another water bottle, and finally two local citizens with spears, water
bags, and a chop box with lunch. We planned to lay up in the heat of the
middle of the day and not get back until dark. It was fine climbing in
the cool fresh morning and very different from toiling up this same
trail last evening in the sunset with all the rocks and dirt giving back
the heat of the day. The trail was used regularly by cattle and the dust
was powdered dry and, now, lightly moistened from the dew. There were
many hyena tracks and, as the trail came on to a ridge of grey rock so
that you could look down on both sides into a steep ravine, and then
went on along the edge of the canyon, we saw a fresh rhino track in one
of the dusty patches below the rocks.

'He's just gone on ahead,' Pop said. 'They must wander all over here at
night.'

Below, at the bottom of the canyon, we could see the tops of high trees
and in an opening see the flash of water. Across were the steep hillside
and the gullies we had studied last night. Droopy and the local guide,
the one who had been chased by the rhino, were whispering together. Then
they started down a steep path that went in long slants down the side of
the canyon.

We stopped. I had not seen P.O.M. was limping, and in sudden whispered
family bitterness there was a highly-righteous-on-both-sides clash,
historically on unwearable shoes and boots in the past, and imperatively
on these, which hurt. The hurt was lessened by cutting off the toes of
the heavy short wool socks worn over ordinary socks, and then, by
removing the socks entirely, the boots made possible. Going down-hill
steeply made these Spanish shooting boots too short in the toe and
there was an old argument, about this length of boot and whether the
bootmaker, whose part I had taken, unwittingly first, only as
interpreter, and finally embraced his theory patriotically as a whole
and, I believed, by logic, had overcome it by adding on to the heel. But
they hurt now, a stronger logic, and the situation was unhelped by the
statement that men's new boots always hurt for weeks before they became
comfortable. Now, heavy socks removed, stepping tentatively, trying the
pressure of the leather against the toes, the argument past, she wanting
not to suffer, but to keep up and please Mr. J. P., me ashamed at having
been a four-letter man about boots, at being righteous against pain, at
being righteous at all, at ever being righteous, stopping to whisper
about it, both of us grinning at what was whispered, it all right now,
the boots too, without the heavy socks, much better, me hating all
righteous bastards now, one absent American friend especially, having
just removed myself from that category, certainly never to be righteous
again, watching Droopy ahead, we went down the long slant of the trail
toward the bottom of the canyon where the trees were heavy and tall and
the floor of the canyon, that from above had been a narrow gash, opened
to a forest-banked stream.

We stood now in the shade of trees with great smooth trunks, circled at
their base with the line of roots that showed in rounded ridges up the
trunks like arteries; the trunks the yellow green of a French forest on
a day in winter after rain. But these trees had a great spread of
branches and were in leaf and below them, in the stream bed in the sun,
reeds like papyrus grass grew thick as wheat and twelve feet tall. There
was a game trail through the grass along the stream and Droopy was bent
down looking at it. M'Cola went over and looked and they both followed
it a little way, stooped close over it, then came back to us.

'Nyati,' M'Cola whispered. 'Buffalo.' Droopy whispered to Pop and then
Pop said, softly in his throaty, whisky whisper, 'They're buff gone down
the river. Droop says there are some big bulls. They haven't come back.'

'Let's follow them,' I said. 'I'd rather get another buff than rhino.'

'It's as good a chance as any for rhino, too,' Pop said.

'By God, isn't it a great looking country?' I said.

'Splendid,' Pop said. 'Who would have imagined it?'

'The trees are like André's pictures,' P.O.M. said. 'It's simply
beautiful. Look at that green. It's Masson. Why can't a good painter see
this country?'

'How are your boots?'

'Fine.'

As we trailed the buffalo we went very slowly and quietly. There was no
wind and we knew that when the breeze came up it would be from the east
and blow up the canyon toward us. We followed the game trail down the
river-bed and as we went the grass was much higher. Twice we had to get
down to crawl and the reeds were so thick you could not see two feet
into them. Droop found a fresh rhino track, too, in the mud. I began to
think about what would happen if a rhino came barging along this tunnel
and who would do what. It was exciting but I did not like it. It was too
much like being in a trap and there was P.O.M. to think about. Then as
the stream made a bend and we came out of the high grass to the bank I
smelled game very distinctly. I do not smoke, and hunting at home I have
several times smelled elk in the rutting season before I have seen them,
and I can smell clearly where an old bull has lain in the forest. The
bull elk has a strong musky smell. It is a strong but pleasant odour and
I know it well, but this smell I did not know.

'I can smell them,' I whispered to Pop. He believed me.

'What is it?'

'I don't know but it's plenty strong. Can't you?'

'No.'

'Ask Droop.'

Droopy nodded and grinned.

'They take snuff,' Pop said. 'I don't know whether they can scent or
not.'

We went on into another bed of reeds that were high over our heads,
putting each foot down silently before lifting the other, walking as
quietly as in a dream or a slow motion picture. I could smell whatever
it was clearly now, all of the time, sometimes stronger than at others.
I did not like it at all. We were close to the bank now, and ahead, the
game trail went straight out into a long slough of higher reeds than any
we had come through.

'I can smell them close as hell,' I whispered to Pop. 'No kidding.
Really.'

'I believe you,' Pop said. 'Should we get up here on to the bank and
skirt this bit? We'll be above it.'

'Good.' Then, when we were up, I said. 'That tall stuff had me spooked.
I wouldn't like to hunt in that.'

'How'd you like to hunt elephant in that?' Pop whispered.

'I wouldn't do it.'

'Do you really hunt elephant in grass like that?' P.O.M. asked.

'Yes,' Pop said. 'Get up on somebody's shoulders to shoot.'

Better men than I am do it, I thought. I wouldn't do it.

We went along the grassy right bank, on a sort of shelf, now in the
open, skirting a slough of high dry reeds. Beyond on the opposite bank
were the heavy trees and above them the steep bank of the canyon. You
could not see the stream. Above us, on the right, were the hills, wooded
in patches of orchard bush. Ahead, at the end of the slough of reeds the
banks narrowed and the branches of the big trees almost covered the stream.
Suddenly Droopy grabbed me and we both crouched down. He put the big gun
in my hand and took the Springfield. He pointed and around a curve in
the bank I saw the head of a rhino with a long, wonderful-looking horn.
The head was swaying and I could see the ears forward and twitching, and
see the little pig eyes. I slipped the safety catch and motioned Droopy
down. Then I heard M'Cola saying, 'Toto! Toto!' and he grabbed my arm.
Droopy was whispering, 'Manamouki! Manamouki! Manamouki!' very fast and
he and M'Cola were frantic that I should not shoot. It was a cow rhino
with a calf, and as I lowered the gun she gave a snort, crashed in the
reeds, and was gone. I never saw the calf. We could see the reeds
swaying where the two of them were moving and then it was all quiet.

'Damn shame,' Pop whispered. 'She had a beautiful horn.'

'I was all set to bust her,' I said. 'I couldn't tell she was a cow.'

'M'Cola saw the calf.'

M'Cola was whispering to Pop and nodding his head emphatically.

'He says there's another rhino in there,' Pop said. 'That he heard him
snort.'

'Let's get higher, where we can see them if they break, and throw
something in,' I said.

'Good idea,' Pop agreed. 'Maybe the bull's there.'

We went a little higher up the bank where we could look out over the
lake of high reeds and, with Pop holding his big gun ready and I with
the safety off mine, M'Cola threw a club into the reeds where he had
heard the snort. There was a wooshing snort and no movement, not a stir
in the reeds. Then there was a crashing farther away and we could see
the reeds swaying with the rush of something through them toward the
opposite bank, but could not see what was making the movement. Then I
saw the black back, the wide-swept, point-lifted horns and then the
quick-moving, climbing rush of a buffalo up the other bank. He went up,
his neck up and out, his head horn-heavy, his withers rounded like a
fighting bull, in fast strong-legged climb. I was holding on the point
where his neck joined his shoulder when Pop stopped me.

'He's not a big one,' he said softly. 'I wouldn't take him unless you
want him for meat.'

He looked big to me and now he stood, his head up, broadside, his head
swung toward us.

'I've got three more on the licence and we're leaving their country,' I
said.

'It's awfully good meat,' Pop whispered. 'Go ahead then. Bust him. But
be ready for the rhino after you shoot.'

I sat down, the big gun feeling heavy and unfamiliar, held on the buff's
shoulder, squeezed off and flinched without firing. Instead of the sweet
clean pull of the Springfield with the smooth, unhesitant release at the
end, this trigger came to what, in a squeeze, seemed metal stuck against
metal. It was like when you shoot in a nightmare. I couldn't squeeze it
and I corrected from my flinch, held my breath, and pulled the trigger.
It pulled off with a jerk and the big gun made a rocking explosion out
of which I came, seeing the buffalo still on his feet, and going out of
sight to the left in a climbing run, to let off the second barrel and
throw a burst of rock dust and dirt over his hind quarters. He was out
of shot before I could reload the double-barrelled ·470 and we had all
heard the snorting and the crashing of another rhino that had gone out
of the lower end of the reeds and on under the heavy trees on our side
without showing more than a glimpse of his bulk in the reeds.

'It was the bull,' Pop said. 'He's gone down the stream.'

'N'Dio. Doumi! Doumi!' Droopy insisted it was a bull.

'I hit the damned buff,' I said. 'God knows where. To hell with those
heavy guns. The trigger pull put me off.'

'You'd have killed him with the Springfield,' Pop said.

'I'd know where I hit him anyway. I thought with the four-seven I'd kill
him or miss him,' I said. 'Instead, now we've got him wounded.'

'He'll keep,' Pop said. 'We want to give him plenty of time.'

'I'm afraid I gut-shot him.'

'You can't tell. Going off fast like that he might be dead in a hundred
yards.'

'The hell with that four-seventy,' I said. 'I can't shoot it. The
trigger's like the last turn of the key opening a sardine can.'

'Come on,' Pop said. 'We've got God knows how many rhino scattered about
here.'

'What about the buff?'

'Plenty of time for him later. We must let him stiffen up. Let him get
sick.'

'Suppose we'd been down there with all that stuff coming out.'

'Yes,' said Pop.

All this in whispers. I looked at P.O.M. She was like someone enjoying a
good musical show.

'Did you see where it hit him?'

'I couldn't tell?' she whispered. 'Do you suppose there are any more in
there?'

'Thousands,' I said. 'What do we do, Pop?'

'That bull may be just around the bend,' Pop said. 'Come on.'

We went along the bank, our nerves cocked, and as we came to the narrow
end of the reeds there was another rush of something heavy through the
tall stalks. I had the gun up waiting for whatever it was to show. But
there was only the waving of the reeds. M'Cola signalled with his hand
not to shoot.

'The calf,' Pop said. 'Must have been two of them. Where's the bloody
bull?'

'How the hell do you see them?'

'Tell by the size.'

Then we were standing looking down into the stream bed, into the shadows
under the branches of the big trees, and off ahead down the stream when
M'Cola pointed up the hill on our right.

'Faro,' he whispered and reached me the glasses.

There on the hillside, head-on, wide, black, looking straight towards
us, ears twitching and head lifted, swaying as the nose searched for the
wind, was another rhino. He looked huge in the glasses. Pop was studying
him with his binoculars.

'He's no better than what you have,' he said softly.

'I can bust him right in the sticking place,' I whispered.

'You have only one more,' Pop whispered. 'You want a good one.'

I offered the glasses to P.O.M.

'I can see him without,' she said. 'He's huge.'

'He may charge,' Pop said. 'Then you'll have to take him.'

Then, as we watched, another rhino came into sight from behind a wide
feathery-topped tree. He was quite a bit smaller.

'By God, it's a calf,' Pop said. 'That one's a cow. Good thing you
didn't shoot her. She bloody well _may_ charge too.'

'Is it the same cow?' I whispered.

'No. That other one had a hell of a horn.'

We all had the nervous exhilaration, like a laughing drunk, that a
sudden over-abundance, idiotic abundance of game makes. It is a feeling
that can come from any sort of game or fish that is ordinarily rare and
that, suddenly, you find in a ridiculously unbelievable abundance.

'Look at her. She knows there's something wrong. But she can't see us or
smell us.'

'She heard the shots.'

'She knows we're here. But she can't make it out.'

The rhino looked so huge, so ridiculous, and so fine to see, and I
sighted on her chest.

'It's a nice shot.'

'Perfect,' Pop said.

'What are we going to do?' P.O.M. said. She was practical.

'We'll work around her,' Pop said.

'If we keep low I don't believe our scent will carry up there once we're
past.'

'You can't tell,' Pop said. 'We don't want her to charge.'

She did not charge, but dropped her head, finally, and worked up the
hill followed by the nearly full-grown calf.

'Now,' said Pop, 'we'll let Droop go ahead and see if he can find the
bull's tracks. We might as well sit down.'

We sat in the shade and Droopy went up one side of the stream and the
local guide the other. They came back and said the bull had gone on
down.

'Did any one ever see what sort of horn he had?' I asked.

'Droop said he was good.'

M'Cola had gone up the hill a little way. Now he crouched and beckoned.

'Nyati,' he said with his hand up to his face.

'Where?' Pop asked him. He pointed, crouched down, and as we crawled up
to him he handed me the glasses. They were a long way away on the
jutting ridge of one of the steep hillsides on the far side of the
canyon, well down the stream. We could see six, then eight buffalo,
black, heavy necked, the horns shining, standing on the point of a
ridge. Some were grazing and others stood, their heads up, watching.

'That one's a bull,' Pop said, looking through the glasses.

'Which one?'

'Second from the right.'

'They all look like bulls to me.'

'They're a long way away. That one's a good bull. Now we've got to cross
the stream and work down toward them and try to get above them.'

'Will they stay there?'

'No. Probably they'll work down into this stream bed as soon as it's
hot.'

'Let's go.'

We crossed the stream on a log and then another log and on the other
side, half way up the hillside, there was a deeply worn game trail that
graded along the bank under the heavily leafed branches of the trees. We
went along quite fast, but walking carefully, and below us, now, the
stream bed was covered solidly with foliage. It was still early in the
morning but the breeze was rising and the leaves stirred over our heads.
We crossed one ravine that came down to the stream, going into the thick
bush to be out of sight and stooping as we crossed behind trees in the
small open place, then, using the shoulder of the ravine as protection,
we climbed so that we might get high up the hillside above the buffalo
and work down to them. We stopped in the shelter of the ridge, me
sweating heavily and fixing a handkerchief inside the sweatband of my
Stetson, and sent Droop ahead to look. He came back to say they were
gone. From above we could see nothing of them, so we cut across the
ravine and the hillside thinking we might intercept them on their way
down into the river bed. The next hillside had been burned and at the
bottom of the hill there was a burned area of bush. In the ash dust were
the tracks of the buffalo as they came down and into the thick jungle of
the stream bed. Here it was too overgrown and there were too many vines
to follow them. There were no tracks going down the stream so we knew
they were down in the part of the stream bed we had looked down on from
the game trail. Pop said there was nothing to do about them in there. It
was so thick that if we jumped them we could not get a shot. You could
not tell one from another, he said. All you could see would be a rush of
black. An old bull would be grey but a good herd bull might be as black
as a cow. It wasn't any good to jump them like that.

It was ten o'clock now and very hot in the open, the sun pegged and the
breeze lifted the ashes of the burned-over ground as we walked.
Everything would be in the thick cover now. We decided to find a shady
place and lie down and read in the cool; to have lunch and kill the hot
part of the day.

Beyond the burned place we came toward the stream and stopped, sweating,
in the shadow of some very large trees. We unpacked our leather coats
and our raincoats and spread them on the grass at the foot of the trees
so that we could lean back against the trunks. P.O.M. got out the books
and M'Cola made a small fire and boiled water for tea.

The breeze was coming up and we could hear it in the high branches. It
was cool in the shade, but if you stirred into the sun, or as the sun
shifted the shadow while you read so that any part of you was out of the
shadow, the sun was heavy. Droopy had gone on down the stream to have a
look, and as we lay there, reading, I could smell the heat of the day
coming, the drying up of the dew, the heat on the leaves, and the
heaviness of the sun over the stream.

P.O.M. was reading _Spanish Gold_, by George A. Birmingham, and she said
it was no good. I still had the Sevastopol book of Tolstoy and in the
same volume I was reading a story called 'The Cossacks' that was very
good. In it were the summer heat, the mosquitoes, the feel of the forest
in the different seasons, and that river that the Tartars crossed,
raiding, and I was living in that Russia again.

I was thinking how real that Russia of the time of our Civil War was, as
real as any other place, as Michigan, or the prairie north of town and
the woods around Evan's game farm, of how, through Turgenev, I knew that
I had lived there, as I had been in the family Buddenbrooks, and had
climbed in and out of her window in _Le Rouge et Le Noir_, or the
morning we had come in the gates of Paris and seen Salcède torn apart by
the horses at the Place de Grèves. I saw all that. And it was me they
did not break on the rack that time because I had been polite to the
executioner the time they killed Coconas and me, and I remember the Eve
of St. Bartholomew's and how we hunted Huguenots that night, and when
they trapped me at her house that time, and no feeling more true than
finding the gate of the Louvre being closed, nor of looking down at his
body in the water where he fell from the mast, and always, Italy, better
than any book, lying in the chestnut woods, and in the fall mist behind
the Duomo going across the town to the Ospedale Maggiore, the nails in
my boots on the cobbles, and in the spring sudden showers in the
mountains and the smell of the regiment like a copper coin in your
mouth. So in the heat the train stopped at Dezenzano and there was Lago
de Garda and those troops are the Czech Legion, and the next time it was
raining, and the next time it was in the dark, and the next time you
passed it riding in a truck, and the next time you were coming from
somewhere else, and the next time you walked to it in the dark from
Sermione. For we have been there in the books and out of the books--and
where we go, if we are any good, there you can go as we have been. A
country, finally, erodes and the dust blows away, the people all die and
none of them were of any importance permanently, except those who
practised the arts, and these now wish to cease their work because it is
too lonely, too hard to do, and is not fashionable. A thousand years
makes economics silly and a work of art endures for ever, but it is very
difficult to do and now it is not fashionable. People do not want to do
it any more because they will be out of fashion and the lice who crawl
on literature will not praise them. Also it is very hard to do. So what?
So I would go on reading about the river that the Tartars came across
when raiding, and the drunken old hunter and the girl and how it was
then in the different seasons.

Pop was reading _Richard Carvell_. We had bought what there was to buy
in Nairobi and we were pretty well to the end of the books.

'I've read this before,' Pop said. 'But it's a good story.'

'I can just remember it. But it was a good story then.'

'It's a jolly good story, but I wish I hadn't read it before.'

'This is terrible,' P.O.M. said. 'You couldn't read it.'

'Do you want this one?'

'Don't be ornamental,' she said. 'No, I'll finish this.'

'Go on. Take it.'

'I'll give it right back.'

'Hey, M'Cola,' I said. 'Beer?'

'N'Dio,' he said with great force, and from the chop box one of the
natives had carried on his head produced, in its straw casing, a bottle
of German beer, one of the sixty-four bottles Dan had brought from the
German trading station. Its neck was wrapped in silver foil and on its
black and yellow label there was a horseman in armour. It was still cool
from the night and opened by the tin-opener it creamed into three cups,
thick-foamed, full-bodied.

'No,' said Pop. 'Very bad for the liver.'

'Come on.'

'All right.'

We all drank and when M'Cola opened the second bottle Pop refused,
firmly.

'Go on. It means more to you. I'm going to take a nap.'

'Poor old Mama?'

'Just a little.'

'All for me,' I said. M'Cola smiled and shook his head at this drinking.
I lay back against the tree and watched the wind bringing the clouds and
drank the beer slowly out of the bottle. It was cooler that way and it
was excellent beer. After a while Pop and P.O.M. were both asleep and I
got back the Sevastopol book and read in 'The Cossacks' again. It was a
good story.

When they woke up we had lunch of cold sliced tenderloin, bread, and
mustard, and a can of plums, and drank the third, and last, bottle of
beer. Then we read again and all went to sleep. I woke thirsty and was
unscrewing the top from a water bottle when I heard a rhino snort and
crash in the brush of the river bed. Pop was awake and heard it too and
we took our guns, without speaking, and started toward where the noise
had come from. M'Cola found the tracks. The rhino had come up the
stream, evidently he had winded us when he was only about thirty yards
away, and had gone on up. We could not follow the tracks the way the
wind was blowing so we circled away from the stream and back to the edge
of the burned place to get above him and then hunted very carefully
against the wind along the stream through very thick bush, but we did
not find him. Finally Droopy found where he had gone up the other side
and on into the hills. From the tracks it did not seem a particularly
large one.

We were a long way from camp, at least four hours as we had come, and
much of it up-hill going back, certainly there would be that long climb
out of the canyon; we had a wounded buffalo to deal with, and when we
came out on the edge of the burned country again, we agreed that we
should get P.O.M. and get started. It was still hot, but the sun was on
its way down and for a good way we would be on the heavily shaded game
trail on the high bank above the stream. When we found P.O.M. she
pretended to be indignant at our going off and leaving her alone but she
was only teasing us.

We started off, Droop and his spearsman in the lead, walking along the
shadow of the trail that was broken by the sun through the leaves.
Instead of the cool early morning smell of the forest there was a nasty
stink like the mess cats make.

'What makes the stink?' I whispered to Pop.

'Baboons,' he said.

A whole tribe of them had gone on just ahead of us and their droppings
were everywhere. We came up to the place where the rhinos and the buff
had come out of the reeds and I located where I thought the buff had
been when I shot. M'Cola and Droopy were casting about like hounds and I
thought they were at least fifty yards too high up the bank when Droop
held up a leaf.

'He's got blood,' Pop said. We went up to them. There was a great
quantity of blood, black now on the grass, and the trail was easy to
follow. Droop and M'Cola trailed one on each side, leaving the trail
between them, pointing to each blood spot formally with a long stem of
grass. I always thought it would be better for one to trail slowly and
the other cast ahead but this was the way they trailed, stooped heads,
pointing each dried splash with their grass stems and occasionally, when
they picked up the tracks after losing them, stooping to pluck a grass
blade or a leaf that had the black stain on it. I followed them with the
Springfield, then came Pop, with P.O.M. behind him. Droop carried my big
gun and Pop had his. M'Cola had P.O.M.'s Mannlicher slung over his
shoulder. None of us spoke and everyone seemed to regard it as a pretty
serious business. In some high grass we found blood, at a pretty good
height on the grass leaves on both sides of the trail where the buff had
gone through the grass. That meant he was shot clean through. You could
not tell the original colour of the blood now, but I had a moment of
hoping he might be shot through the lungs. But farther on we came on
some droppings in the rocks with blood in them and then for a while he
had dropped dung wherever he climbed and all of it was blood-spotted. It
looked, now, like a gut shot or one through the paunch. I was more
ashamed of it all the time.

'If he comes don't worry about Droopy or the others,' Pop whispered.
'They'll get out of his way. Stop him.'

'Right up the nose,' I said.

'Don't try anything fancy,' Pop said. The trail climbed steadily, then
twice looped back on itself and for a time seemed to wander, without
plan, among some rocks. Once it lead down to the stream, crossed a
rivulet of it and then came back up on the same bank, grading up through
the trees.

'I think we'll find him dead,' I whispered to Pop. That aimless turn had
made me see him, slow and hard hit, getting ready to go down.

'I hope so,' Pop said.

But the trail went on, where there was little grass now, and trailing
was much slower and more difficult. There were no tracks now that I
could see, only the probable line he would take, verified by a shiny
dark splatter of dried blood on a stone. Several times we lost it
entirely and, the three of us making casts, one would find it, point
and whisper 'Damu', and we would go on again. Finally it led down from a
rocky hillside with the last of the sun on it, down into the stream bed
where there was a long, wide patch of the highest dead reeds that we had
seen. These were higher and thicker even than the slough the buff had
come out of in the morning and there were several game trails that went
into them.

'Not good enough to take the little Memsahib in there,' Pop said.

'Let her stay here with M'Cola,' I said.

'It's not good enough for the little Memsahib,' Pop repeated. 'I don't
know why we let her come.'

'She can wait here. Droop wants to go on.'

'Right you are. We'll have a look.'

'You wait here with M'Cola,' I whispered over my shoulder.

We followed Droopy into the thick, tall grass that was five feet above
our heads, walking carefully on the game trail, stooping forward, trying
to make no noise breathing. I was thinking of the buff the way I had
seen them when we had gotten the three that time, how the old bull had
come out of the bush, groggy as he was, and I could see the horns, the
boss coming far down, the muzzle out, the little eyes, the roll of fat
and muscle on his thin-haired, grey, scaly-hided neck, the heavy power
and the rage in him, and I admired him and respected him, but he was
slow, and all the while we shot I felt that it was fixed and that we had
him. This was different, this was no rapid fire, no pouring it on him as
he comes groggy into the open, if he comes now I must be quiet inside
and put it down his nose as he comes with the head out. He will have to
put the head down to hook, like any bull, and that will uncover the old
place the boys wet their knuckles on and I will get one in there and
then must go sideways into the grass and he would be Pop's from then on
unless I could keep the rifle when I jumped. I was sure I could get that
one in and jump if I could wait and watch his head come down. I knew I
could do that and that the shot would kill him but how long would it
take? That was the whole thing. How long would it take? Now, going
forward, sure he was in here, I felt the elation, the best elation of
all, of certain action to come, action in which you had something to do,
in which you can kill and come out of it, doing something you are
ignorant about and so not scared, no one to worry about and no
responsibility except to perform something you feel sure you can
perform, and I was walking softly ahead watching Droopy's back and
remembering to keep the sweat out of my glasses when I heard a noise
behind us and turned my head. It was P.O.M. with M'Cola coming on our
tracks.

'For God's sake,' Pop said. He was furious.

We got her back out of the grass and up on to the bank and made her
realize that she must stay there. She had not understood that she was to
stay behind. She had heard me whisper something but thought it was for
her to come behind M'Cola.

'That spooked me,' I said to Pop.

'She's like a little terrier,' he said. 'But it's not good enough.'

We were looking out over that grass.

'Droop wants to go still,' I said. 'I'll go as far as he will. When he
says no that lets us out. After all, I gut-shot the son of a bitch.'

'Mustn't do anything silly, though.'

'I can kill the son of a bitch if I get a shot at him. If he comes he's
got to give me a shot.'

The fright P.O.M. had given us about herself had made me noisy.

'Come on,' said Pop. We followed Droopy back in and it got worse and
worse, and I do not know about Pop but about half-way I changed to the
big gun and kept the safety off and my hand over the trigger guard and I
was plenty nervous by the time Droopy stopped and shook his head and
whispered 'Hapana'. It had gotten so you could not see a foot ahead and
it was all turns and twists. It was really bad and the sun was only on
the hillside now. We both felt good because we had made Droopy do the
calling off and I was relieved as well. What we had followed him into
had made my fancy shooting plans seem very silly and I knew all we had
in there was Pop to blast him over with the four-fifty number two after
I'd maybe miss him with that lousy four-seventy. I had no confidence in
anything but its noise any more.

We were back trailing when we heard the porters on the hillside shout
and we ran crashing through the grass to try to get a high enough place
to see to shoot. They waved their arms and shouted that the buffalo had
come out of the reeds and gone past them and then M'Cola and Droopy were
pointing, and Pop had me by the sleeve trying to pull me to where I
could see them and then, in the sunlight, high up on the hillside
against the rocks I saw two buffalo. They shone very black in the sun
and one was much bigger than the other and I remember thinking this was
our bull and that he had picked up a cow and she had made the pace and
kept him going. Droop had handed me the Springfield and I slipped my arm
through the sling and sighting, the buff now all seen through the
aperture, I froze myself inside and held the bead on the top of his
shoulder and as I started to squeeze he started running and I swung
ahead of him and loosed off. I saw him lower his head and jump like a
bucking horse as he comes out of the chutes and as I threw the shell,
slammed the bolt forward and shot again, behind him as he went out of
sight, I knew I had him. Droopy and I started to run and as we were
running I heard a low bellow. I stopped and yelled at Pop, 'Hear him?
I've got him, I tell you!'

'You hit him,' said Pop. 'Yes.'

'Goddamn it, I killed him. Didn't you hear him bellow?'

'No.'

'Listen!' We stood listening and there it came, clear, a long, moaning,
unmistakable bellow.

'By God,' Pop said. It was a very sad noise.

M'Cola grabbed my hand and Droopy slapped my back and all laughing we
started on a running scramble, sweating, rushing, up the ridge through
the trees and over rocks. I had to stop for breath, my heart pounding,
and wiped the sweat off my face and cleaned my glasses.

'Kufa!' M'Cola said, making the word for dead almost explosive in its
force. 'N'Dio! Kufa!'

'Kufa!' Droopy said grinning.

'Kufa!' M'Cola repeated and we shook hands again before we went on
climbing. Then, ahead of us, we saw him, on his back, throat stretched
out to the full, his weight on his horns, wedged against a tree. M'Cola
put his finger in the bullet hole in the centre of the shoulder and
shook his head happily.

Pop and P.O.M. came up, followed by the porters.

'By God, he's a better bull than we thought,' I said.

'He's not the same bull. This is a real bull. That must have been our
bull with him.'

'I thought he was with a cow. It was so far away I couldn't tell.'

'It must have been four hundred yards. By God, you _can_ shoot that
little pipsqueak.'

'When I saw him put his head down between his legs and buck I knew we
had him. The light was wonderful on him.'

'I knew you had hit him, and I knew he wasn't the same bull. So I
thought we had two wounded buffalo to deal with. I didn't hear the first
bellow.'

'It was wonderful when we heard him bellow,' P.O.M. said. 'It's such a
sad sound. It's like hearing a horn in the woods.'

'It sounded awfully jolly to me,' Pop said. 'By God, we deserve a drink
on this. That was a shot. Why didn't you ever tell us you could shoot?'

'Go to hell.'

'You know he's a damned good tracker, too, and what kind of a bird
shot?' he asked P.O.M.

'Isn't he a beautiful bull?' P.O.M. asked.

'He's a fine one. He's not old but it's a fine head.'

We tried to take pictures but there was only the little box camera and
the shutter stuck, and there was a bitter argument about the shutter
while the light failed, and I was nervous now, irritable, righteous,
pompous about the shutter and inclined to be abusive because we could
get no picture. You cannot live on a plane of the sort of elation I had
felt in the reeds and having killed, even when it is only a buffalo, you
feel a little quiet inside. Killing is not a feeling that you share and
I took a drink of water and told P.O.M. I was sorry I was such a bastard
about the camera. She said it was all right and we were all right again
looking at the buff with M'Cola making the cuts for the headskin and we
standing close together and feeling fond of each other and understanding
everything, camera and all. I took a drink of the whisky and it had no
taste and I felt no kick from it.

'Let me have another,' I said. The second one was all right.

We were going on ahead to camp with the chased-by-a-rhino spearman as
guide and Droop was going to skin out the head and they were going to
butcher and cache the meat in trees so the hyenas would not get it. They
were afraid to travel in the dark and I told Droopy he could keep my big
gun. He said he knew how to shoot so I took out the shells and put on
the safety and handing it to him told him to shoot. He put it to his
shoulder, shut the wrong eye, and pulled hard on the trigger, and
again, and again. Then I showed him about the safety and had him put it
on and off and snap the gun a couple of times. M'Cola became very
superior during Droopy's struggle to fire with the safety on and Droopy
seemed to get much smaller. I left him the gun and two cartridges and
they were all busy butchering in the dusk when we followed the spearsman
and the tracks of the smaller buff, which had no blood on them, up to
the top of the hill and on our way toward home. We climbed around the
tops of valleys, went across gulches, up and down ravines and finally
came on to the main ridge, it dark and cold in the evening, the moon not
yet up, we plodded along, all tired. Once M'Cola, in the dark, loaded
with Pop's heavy gun and an assortment of water bottles, binoculars, and
a musette bag of books, sung out a stream of what sounded like curses at
the guide who was striding ahead.

'What's he say?' I asked Pop.

'He's telling him not to show off his speed. That there is an old man in
the party.'

'Who does he mean, you or himself?'

'Both of us.'

We saw the moon come up, smoky red over the brown hills, and we came
down through the chinky lights of the village, the mud houses all closed
tight, and the smells of goats and sheep, and then across the stream and
up the bare slope to where the fire was burning in front of our tents.
It was a cold night with much wind.

In the morning we hunted, picked up a track at a spring and trailed a
rhino all over the high orchard country before he went down into a
valley that led, steeply, into the canyon. It was very hot and the tight
boots of the day before had chafed P.O.M.'s feet. She did not complain
about them but I could see they hurt her. We were all luxuriantly,
restfully tired.

'The hell with them,' I said to Pop. 'I don't want to kill another one
unless he's big. We might hunt a week for a good one. Let's stand on the
one we have and pull out and join Karl. We can hunt oryx down there and
get those zebra hides and get on after the kudu.'

We were sitting under a tree on the summit of a hill and could see off
over all the country and the canyon running down to the Rift Valley and
Lake Manyara.

'It would be good fun to take porters and a light outfit and hunt on
ahead of them down through that valley and out to the lake,' Pop said.

'That would be swell. We could send the lorries around to meet us at
what's the name of the place?'

'Maji-Moto.'

'Why don't we do that?' P.O.M. asked.

'We'll ask Droopy how the valley is.'

Droopy didn't know but the spearman said it was very rough and bad going
where the stream came down through the rift wall. He did not think we
could get the loads through. We gave it up.

'That's the sort of trip to make, though,' Pop said. 'Porters don't cost
as much as petrol.'

'Can't we make trips like that when we come back?' P.O.M. asked.

'Yes,' Pop said. 'But for a big rhino you want to go up on Mount Kenya.
You'll get a real one there. Kudu's the prize here. You'd have to go up
to Kalal to get one in Kenya. Then if we get them, we'll have time to go
on down in that Handeni country for sable.'

'Let's get going,' I said without moving.

Since a long time we had all felt good about Karl's rhino. We were glad
he had it and all of that had taken on a correct perspective. Maybe he
had his oryx by now. I hoped so. He was a fine fellow, Karl, and it was
good he got these extra fine heads.

'How do you feel, poor old Mama?'

'I'm fine. If we _are_ going I'll be just as glad to rest my feet. But I
love this kind of hunting.'

'Let's get back, eat, break camp, and get down there to-night.'

That night we got into our old camp at M'utu-Umbu, under the big trees,
not far from the road. It had been our first camp in Africa and the
trees were as big, as spreading, and as green, the stream as clear and
fast flowing, and the camp as fine as when we had first been there. The
only difference was that now it was hotter at night, the road in was
hub-deep in dust, and we had seen a lot of country.




CHAPTER FOUR


We had come down to the Rift Valley by a sandy red road across a high
plateau, then up and down through orchard-bushed hills, around a slope
of forest to the top of the rift wall where we could look down and see
the plain, the heavy forest below the wall, and the long, dried-up edged
shine of Lake Manyara rose-coloured at one end with a half million tiny
dots that were flamingoes. From there the road dropped steeply along the
face of the wall, down into the forest, on to the flatness of the
valley, through cultivated patches of green corn, bananas, and trees I
did not know the names of, walled thick with forest, past a Hindu's
trading store and many huts, over two bridges where clear, fast-flowing
streams ran, through more forest, thinning now to open glades, and into
a dusty turn-off that led into a deeply rutted, dust-filled track
through bushes to the shade of M'utu-Umbu camp.

That night after dinner we heard the flamingoes flighting in the dark.
It was like the sound the wings of ducks make as they go over before it
is light, but slower, with a steady beat, and multiplied a thousand
times. Pop and I were a little drunk and P.O.M. was very tired. Karl was
gloomy again. We had taken the edge from his victories over rhino and
now that was past anyway and he was facing possible defeat by oryx.
Then, too, they had found not a leopard but a marvellous lion, a huge,
black-maned lion that did not want to leave, on the rhino carcass when
they had gone there the next morning and could not shoot him because he
was in some sort of forest reserve.

'That's rotten,' I said and I tried to feel bad about it but I was still
feeling much too good to appreciate any one else's gloom, and Pop and I
sat, tired through to our bones, drinking whisky and soda and talking.

The next day we hunted oryx in the dried-up dustiness of the Rift Valley
and finally found a herd way off at the edge of the wooded hills on the
far side above a Masai village. They were like a bunch of Masai donkeys
except for the beautiful straight-slanting black horns and all the heads
looked good. When you looked closely two or three were obviously better
than the others and sitting on the ground I picked what I thought was
the very best of the lot and as they strung out I made sure of this one.
I heard the bullet smack and watched the oryx circle out away from the
others, the circle quickening, and knew I had it. So I did not shoot
again.

This was the one Karl had picked, too. I did not know that, but had
shot, deliberately selfish, to make sure of the best this time at least,
but he got another good one and they went off in a wind-lifted cloud of
grey dust as they galloped. Except for the miracle of their horns there
was no more excitement in shooting them than if they had been donkeys,
and after the lorry came up and M'Cola and Charo had skinned the heads
out and cut up the meat we rode home in the blowing dust, our faces
grey with it, and the valley one long heat mirage.

We stayed at that camp two days. We had to get some zebra hides that we
had promised friends at home and it needed time for the skinner to
handle them properly. Getting the zebra was no fun; the plain was dull,
now that the grass had dried, hot and dusty after the hills, and the
picture that remains is of sitting against an ant hill with, in the
distance, a herd of zebra galloping in the grey heat haze, raising a
dust, and on the yellow plain, the birds circling over a white patch
there, another beyond, there a third, and looking back, the plume of
dust of the lorry coming with the skinners and the men to cut up the
meat for the village. I did some bad shooting in the heat on a Grant's
gazelle that the volunteer skinners asked me to kill them for meat,
wounding him in a running shot after missing him three or four times,
and then following him across the plain until almost noon in that heat
until I got within range and killed him.

But that afternoon we went out along the road that ran through the
settlement and past the corner of the Hindu's general store, where he
smiled at us in well-oiled, unsuccessful-storekeeping, brotherly
humanity, and hopeful salesmanship, turned the car off to the left on to
a track that went into the deep forest, a narrow brush-bordered track
through the heavy timber, that crossed a stream on an unsound log and
pole bridge and went on until the timber thinned and we came out into a
grassy savannah that stretched ahead to the reed-edged, dried-up bed of
the lake with, far beyond, the shine of the water and the rose-pink of
the flamingoes. There were some grass huts of fishermen in the shade of
the last trees and ahead the wind blew across the grass of the savannah
and the dried bed of the lake showed a white-grey with many small
animals humping across its baked surface as our car alarmed them. They
were reed buck and they looked strange and awkward as they moved in the
distance but trim and graceful as you saw them standing close. We turned
the car out through the thick, short grass and on to the dried lake
floor and everywhere, to the left and to the right, where the streams
flowed out into the lake and made a reedy marsh that ran down toward the
receded lake, cut by canals of water, ducks were flying and we could see
big flocks of geese spread over the grassy hummocks that rose above the
marsh. The dried bed was hard and firm and we drove the car until it
commenced to look moist and soft ahead, then left the motor car standing
there, and, Karl taking Charo and I, M'Cola, to carry shells and birds,
we agreed to work one on one side and one the other of the marsh and try
to shoot and keep the birds moving while Pop and P.O.M. went into the
edge of the high reeds on the left shore of the lake where another
stream made a thick marsh to which we thought the ducks might fly.

We saw them walk across the open, a big bulky figure in a faded corduroy
coat and a very small one in trousers, grey khaki jacket, boots, and a
big hat, and then disappear as they crouched in a point of dried reeds
before we started. But as we went out to reach the edge of the stream we
soon saw the plan was no good. Even watching carefully for the firmest
footing you sunk down in the cool mud to the knees, and, as it became
less mucky and there were more hummocks broken by water, sometimes I
went in to the waist. The ducks and geese flew up out of range and after
the first flock had swung across toward where the others were hidden in
the reeds and we heard the sharp, small, double report of P.O.M.'s
28-gauge and saw the ducks wheel off and go out toward the lake, the
other scattered flocks and the geese all went toward the open water. A
flock of dark ibises, looking, with their dipped bills, like great
curlews, flew over from the marsh on the side of the stream where Karl
was and circled high above us before they went back into the reeds. All
through the bog were snipe and black and white godwits and finally, not
being able to get within range of the ducks, I began to shoot snipe to
M'Cola's great disgust. We followed the marsh out and then I crossed
another stream, shoulder high, holding my gun and shooting coat with
shells in the pocket above my head and finally trying to work toward
where P.O.M. and Pop were, found a deep flowing stream where teal were
flying, and killed three. It was nearly dark now and I found Pop and
P.O.M. on the far bank of this stream at the edge of the dried lake bed.
It all looked too deep to wade and the bottom was soft but finally I
found a heavily worn hippo trail that went into the stream and treading
on this, the bottom fairly firm under foot, I made it, the water coming
just under my armpits. As I came out on the grass and stood dripping a
flock of teal came over very fast, and, crouching to shoot in the dusk
at the same time Pop did, we cut down three that fell hard in a long
slant ahead in the tall grass. We hunted carefully and found them all.
Their speed had carried them much farther than we expected and then,
almost dark now, we started for the car across the grey dried mud of the
lake bed, me soaked and my boots squashing water, P.O.M. pleased with
the ducks, the first we'd had since the Serengetti, we all remembering
how marvellous they were to eat, and ahead we could see the car looking
very small and beyond it a stretch of flat, baked mud and then the
grassy savannah and the forest.

Next day we came in from the zebra business grey and sweat-caked with
dust that the car raised and the wind blew over us on the way home
across the plain. P.O.M. and Pop had not gone out, there was nothing for
them to do and no need for them to eat that dust, and Karl and I out on
the plain in the too much sun and dust had gone through one of those
rows that starts like this, 'What was the matter?'

'They were too far.'

'Not at the start.'

'They were too far, I tell you.'

'They get hard if you don't take them.'

'You shoot them.'

'I've got enough. We only want twelve hides altogether. You go ahead.'

Then someone, angry, shooting too fast to show he was being asked to
shoot too fast, getting up from behind the ant hill and turning away in
disgust, walking towards his partner, who says, smugly, 'What's the
matter with them?'

'They're too damned far, I tell you,' desperately.

The smug one, complacently, 'Look at them'.

The zebra that had galloped off had seen the approaching lorry of the
skinners and had circled and were standing now, broadside, in easy
range.

The one looks, says nothing, too angry now to shoot. Then says, 'Go
ahead. Shoot'.

The smug one, more righteous now than ever, refuses. 'Go ahead,' he
says.

'I'm through,' says the other. He knows he is too angry to shoot and he
feels he has been tricked. Something is always tricking him, the need to
do things other than in a regular order, or by an inexact command in
which details are not specified, or to have to do it in front of people,
or to be hurried.

'We've got eleven,' says smug face, sorry now. He knows he should not
hurry him, that he should leave him alone, that he only upsets him by
trying to speed him up, and that he has been a smugly righteous bastard
again. 'We can pick up the other one any time. Come on, Bo, we'll go
in.'

'No, let's get him. You get him.'

'No, let's go in.'

And as the car comes up and you ride in through the dust the bitterness
goes and there is only the feeling of shortness of time again.

'What you thinking about now?' you ask. 'What a son of a bitch I am,
still?'

'About this afternoon,' he says and grins, making wrinkles in the caked
dust on his face.

'Me too,' you say.

Finally the afternoon comes and you start.

This time you wear canvas ankle-high shoes, light to pull out when you
sink, you work out from hummock to hummock, picking a way across the
marsh and wade and flounder through the canals and the ducks fly as
before out to the lake, but you make a long circle to the right and come
out into the lake itself and find the bottom hard and firm and walking
knee deep in the water get outside the big flocks, then there is a shot
and you and M'Cola crouch, heads bent, and then the air is full of them,
and you cut down two, then two again, and then a high one straight
overhead, then miss a fast one straight and low to the right, then they
come whistling back, passing faster than you can load and shoot, you
brown a bunch to get cripples for decoys and then take only fancy shots
because you know now you can get all that we can use or carry. You try
the high one, straight overhead and almost leaning backward, the _coup
de roi_, and splash a big black duck down beside M'Cola, him laughing,
then, the four cripples swimming away, you decide you better kill them
and pick up. You have to run in water to your knees to get in range of
the last cripple and you slip and go face down and are sitting, enjoying
being completely wet finally, water cool on your behind, soaked with
muddy water, wiping off glasses, and then getting the water out of the
gun, wondering if you can shoot up the shells before they will swell,
M'Cola delighted with the spill. He, with the shooting coat now full of
ducks, crouches and a flock of geese pass over in easy range while you
try to pump a wet shell in. You get a shell in, shoot, but it is too
far, or you were behind, and at the shot you see the cloud of flamingoes
rise in the sun, making the whole horizon of the lake pink. Then they
settle. But after that each time after you shoot you turn and look out
into the sun on the water and see that quick rise of the unbelievable
cloud and then the slow settling.

'M'Cola,' you say and point.

'N'Dio,' he says, watching them. 'M'uzuri!' and hands you more shells.

We all had good shooting but it was best out on the lake and for three
days afterward, travelling, we had cold teal, the best of ducks to eat,
fine, plump, and tender, cold with Pan-Yan pickles, and the red wine we
bought at Babati, sitting by the road waiting for the lorries to come
up, sitting on the shady porch of the little hotel at Babati, then late
at night when the lorries finally came in and we were at the house of an
absent friend of a friend high up in the hills, cold at night, wearing
coats at the table, having waited so long for the broken-down lorry to
come that we all drank much too much and were unspeakably hungry, P.O.M.
dancing with the manager of the coffee shamba, and with Karl, to the
gramophone, me shot full of emetine and with a ringing headache drowning
it successfully in whisky-soda with Pop on the porch, it dark and the
wind blowing a gale, and then those teal coming on the table, smoking
hot and with fresh vegetables. Guinea hen were all right, and I had one
now in the lunch box in the back of the car that I would eat to-night;
but those teal were the finest of all.

From Babati we had driven through the hills to the edge of a plain,
wooded in a long stretch of glade beyond a small village where there was
a mission station at the foot of a mountain. Here we had made a camp to
hunt kudu which were supposed to be in the wooded hills and in the
forests on the flats that stretched out to the edge of the open plain.




CHAPTER FIVE


It was a hot place to camp, under trees that had been girdled to kill
them so that the tsetse fly would leave, and there was hard hunting in
the hills, which were steep, brushy, and very broken, with a hard climb
before you got up into them, and easy hunting on the wooded flats where
you wandered as though through a deer park. But everywhere were tsetse
flies, swarming around you, biting hard on your neck, through your
shirt, on arms, and behind the ears. I carried a leafy branch and
swished away at the back of my neck as we walked and we hunted five
days, from daylight until dark, coming home after dark, dead tired but
glad of the coolness and of the darkness that stopped the tsetse from
biting. We took turns hunting the hills and the flats and Karl became
steadily gloomier although he killed a very fine roan antelope. He had
gotten a very complicated personal feeling about kudu and, as always
when he was confused, it was someone's fault, the guides, the choice of
beat, the hills; these all betrayed him. The hills punished him and he
did not believe in the flats. Each day I hoped he would get one and that
the atmosphere would clear but each day his feelings about the kudu
complicated the hunting. He was never a climber and took real punishment
in the hills. I tried to take the bulk of the hill beats to relieve him
but I could see, now that he was tired he felt they probably _were_ in
the hills and he was missing his chance.

In the five days I saw a dozen or more kudu cows and one young bull with
a string of cows. The cows were big, grey, striped-flanked antelope with
ridiculously small heads, big ears, and a soft, fast-rushing gait that
moved them in big-bellied panic through the trees. The young bull had
the start of a spiral on his horns but they were short and dumpy and as
he ran past us at the end of a glade in the dusk, third in a string of
six cows, he was no more like a real bull than a spike elk is like a
big, old, thick-necked, dark-maned, wonder-horned, tawny-hided,
beer-horse-built bugler of a bull-elk.

Another time, headed home as the sun went down along a steep valley in
the hills, the guides pointed to two grey, white-striped, moving
animals, against the sun at the top of the hill, showing only their
flanks through the trunks of the trees and said they were kudu bulls. We
could not see the horns and when we got up to the top of the hill the
sun was gone and on the rocky ground we could not find their tracks. But
from the glimpse we had they looked higher in the legs than the cows we
saw and they might have been bulls. We hunted the ridges until dark but
never saw them again nor did Karl find them the next day when we sent
him there.

We jumped many waterbuck and once, still hunting along a ridge with a
steep gully below, we came on a waterbuck that had heard us, but not
scented us, and as we stood, perfectly quiet, M'Cola holding his hand
on mine, we watched him, only a dozen feet away, standing, beautiful,
dark, full-necked, a dark ruff on his neck, his horns up, trembling all
over as his nostrils widened searching for the scent. M'Cola was
grinning, pressing his fingers tight on my wrist and we watched the big
buck shiver from the danger that he could not locate. Then there was the
distant, heavy boom of a native black powder gun and the buck jumped and
almost ran over us as he crashed up the ridge.

Another day, with P.O.M. along, we had hunted all through the timbered
flat and come out to the edge of the plain where there were only clumps
of bush and sanseviera when we heard a deep, throaty, cough. I looked at
M'Cola.

'Simba,' he said, and did not look pleased.

'Wapi?' I whispered. 'Where?'

He pointed.

I whispered to P.O.M., 'It's a lion. Probably the one we heard early
this morning. You go back to those trees.'

We had heard a lion roaring just before daylight when we were getting
up.

'I'd rather stay with you.'

'It wouldn't be fair to Pop,' I said. 'You wait back there.'

'All right. But you _will_ be careful.'

'I won't take anything but a standing shot and I won't shoot unless I'm
sure of him.'

'All right.'

'Come on,' I said to M'Cola.

He looked very grave and did not like it at all.

'Wapi Simba?' I whispered.

'Here,' he said dismally and pointed at the broken islands of thick,
green spiky cover. I motioned to one of the guides to go back with
P.O.M. and we watched them go back a couple of hundred yards to the edge
of the forest.

'Come on,' I said. M'Cola shook his head without smiling but followed.
We went forward very slowly, looking into and trying to see through the
senseviera. We could see nothing. Then we heard the cough again, a
little ahead and to the right.

'_No!_' M'Cola whispered. '_Hapana_, B'wana!'

'Come on,' I said. I pointed my forefinger into my neck and wriggled the
thumb down. 'Kufa,' I whispered, meaning that I would shoot the lion in
the neck and kill him dead. M'Cola shook his head, his face grave and
sweating. 'Hapana!' he whispered.

There was an ant-hill ahead and we climbed the furrowed clay and from
the top looked all around. We could not make out anything in the green
cactus-like cover. I had believed we might see him from the ant-hill and
after we came down we went on for about two hundred yards into the
broken cactus. Once again we heard him cough ahead of us and once, a
little farther on, we heard a growl. It was very deep and very
impressive. Since the ant heap my heart had not been in it. Until that
had failed I had believed I might have a close and good shot and I knew
that if I could kill one alone, without Pop along, I would feel good
about it for a long time. I had made up my mind absolutely not to shoot
unless I knew I could kill him, I had killed three and knew what it
consisted in, but I was getting more excitement from this one than the
whole trip. I felt it was perfectly fair to Pop to take it on as long as
I had a chance to call the shot but what we were getting into now was
bad. He kept moving away as we came on, but slowly. Evidently he did not
want to move, having fed, probably, when we had heard him roaring in the
early morning, and he wanted to settle down now. M'Cola hated it. How
much of it was the responsibility he felt for me to Pop and how much was
his own acute feeling of misery about the dangerous game I did not know.
But he felt very miserable. Finally he put his hand on my shoulder, put
his face almost into mine and shook his head violently three times.

'Hapana! Hapana! Hapana! B'wana!' he protested, sorrowed, and pleaded.

After all, I had no business taking him where I could not call the shot
and it was a profound personal relief to turn back.

'All right,' I said. We turned around and came back out the same way we
had gone in, then crossed the open prairie to the trees where P.O.M. was
waiting.

'Did you see him?'

'No,' I told her. 'We heard him three or four times.'

'Weren't you frightened?'

'Pea-less,' I said, 'at the last. But I'd rather have shot him in there
than any damned thing in the world.'

'My, I'm glad you're back,' she said. I got the dictionary out of my
pocket and made a sentence in pigeon Swahili. 'Like' was the word I
wanted.

'M'Cola like Simba?'

M'Cola could grin again now and the smile moved the Chinese hairs at the
corner of his mouth.

'Hapana,' he said, and waved his hand in front of his face. 'Hapana!'

'Hapana' is a negative.

'Shoot a kudu?' I suggested.

'Good,' said M'Cola feelingly in Swahili. 'Better. Best. Tendalla, yes.
Tendalla.'

But we never saw a kudu bull out of that camp and we left two days later
to go into Babati and then down to Kondoa and strike across country
toward Handeni and the coast.

I never liked that camp, nor the guides, nor the country. It had that
picked-over, shot-out feeling. We knew there were kudu there and the
Prince of Wales had killed his kudu from that camp, but there had been
three other parties in that season, and the natives were hunting,
supposedly defending their crops from baboons, but on meeting a native
with a brass-bound musket it seemed odd that he should follow the
baboons ten miles away from his shamba up into the kudu hills to have a
shot at them, and I was all for pulling out and trying the new country
toward Handeni where none of us had ever been.

'Let's go then,' Pop said.

It seemed this new country was a gift. Kudu came out into the open and
you sat and waited for the more enormous ones and selecting a suitable
head, blasted him over. Then there were sable and we agreed that whoever
killed the first kudu should move on in the sable country. I was
beginning to feel awfully good and Karl was very cheerful at the
prospect of this new miraculous country where they were so
unsophisticated that it was really a shame to topple them over.

We left, soon after daylight, ahead of the outfit, who were to strike
camp and follow in the two lorries. We stopped in Babati at the little
hotel overlooking the lake and bought some more Pan-Yan pickles and had
some cold beer. Then we started south on the Cape to Cairo road, here
well graded, smooth, and carefully cut through wooded hills overlooking
the long yellow stretch of plains of the Masai Steppes, down and through
farming country, where the dried-breasted old women and the
shrunken-flanked, hollow-ribbed old men hoed in the cornfields, through
miles and dusty miles of this, and then into a valley of sun-baked,
eroded land where the soil was blowing away in clouds as you looked,
into the tree-shaded, pretty, whitewashed, German model-garrison town of
Kandoa-Irangi.

We left M'Cola at the crossroads to hold up our lorries when they came,
put the car into some shade and visited the military cemetery. We
intended to call on the D.O. but they were at lunch, and we did not want
to bother them, so after the military cemetery, which was a pleasant,
clean, well-kept place and as good as another to be dead in, we had some
beer under a tree in shade that seemed liquid cool after the white glare
of a sun that you could feel the weight of on your neck and shoulders,
started the car and went out to the crossroads to pick up the lorries
and head to the east into the new country.




CHAPTER SIX


It was a new country to us but it had the marks of the oldest countries.
The road was a track over shelves of solid rock, worn by the feet of the
caravans and the cattle, and it rose in the boulder-strewn un-roadliness
through a double line of trees and into the hills. The country was so
much like Aragon that I could not believe that we were not in Spain
until, instead of mules with saddle bags, we met a dozen natives
bare-legged and bare-headed dressed in white cotton cloth they wore
gathered over the shoulder like a toga; but when they had passed, the
high trees beside the track over those rocks was Spain and I had
followed this same route forged on ahead and following close behind a
horse one time watching the horror of the flies scuttling around his
crupper. They were the same camel flies we found here on the lions. In
Spain if one got inside your shirt you had to get the shirt off to kill
him. He'd go inside the neckband, down the back, around and under one
arm, make for the navel and the belly band, and if you did not get him
he would move with such intelligence and speed that, scuttling flat and
uncrushable he would make you undress completely to kill him.

That day of watching the camel flies working under the horse's tail,
having had them myself, gave me more horror than anything I could
remember except one time in a hospital with my right arm broken off
short between the elbow and the shoulder, the back of the hand having
hung down against my back, the points of the bone having cut up the
flesh of the biceps until it finally rotted, swelled, burst, and
sloughed off in pus. Alone with the pain in the night in the fifth week
of not sleeping I thought suddenly how a bull elk must feel if you break
a shoulder and he gets away and in that night I lay and felt it all, the
whole thing as it would happen from the shock of the bullet to the end
of the business and, being a little out of my head, thought perhaps what
I was going through was a punishment for all hunters. Then, getting
well, decided if it was a punishment I had paid it and at least I knew
what I was doing. I did nothing that had not been done to me. I had been
shot and I had been crippled and gotten away. I expected, always, to be
killed by one thing or another and I, truly, did not mind that any more.
Since I still loved to hunt I resolved that I would only shoot as long
as I could kill cleanly and as soon as I lost that ability I would stop.

If you serve time for society, democracy, and the other things quite
young, and declining any further enlistment make yourself responsible
only to yourself, you exchange the pleasant, comforting stench of
comrades for something you can never feel in any other way than by
yourself. That something I cannot yet define completely but the feeling
comes when you write well and truly of something and know impersonally
you have written in that way and those who are paid to read it and
report on it do not like the subject so they say it is all a fake, yet
you know its value absolutely; or when you do something which people do
not consider a serious occupation and yet you know, truly, that it is as
important and has always been as important as all the things that are in
fashion, and when, on the sea, you are alone with it and know that this
Gulf Stream you are living with, knowing, learning about, and loving,
has moved, as it moves, since before man, and that it has gone by the
shoreline of that long, beautiful, unhappy island since before Columbus
sighted it and that the things you find out about it, and those that
have always lived in it are permanent and of value because that stream,
will flow, as it has flowed, after the Indians, after the Spaniards,
after the British, after the Americans and after all the Cubans and all
the systems of governments, the richness, the poverty, the martyrdom,
the sacrifice and the venality and the cruelty are all gone as the
high-piled scow of garbage, bright-coloured, white-flecked;
ill-smelling, now tilted on its side, spills off its load into the blue
water, turning it a pale green to a depth of four or five fathoms as the
load spreads across the surface, the sinkable part going down and the
flotsam of palm fronds, corks, bottles, and used electric light globes,
seasoned with an occasional condom or a deep floating corset, the torn
leaves of a student's exercise book, a well-inflated dog, the occasional
rat, the no-longer-distinguished cat; all this well shepherded by the
boats of the garbage pickers who pluck their prizes with long poles, as
interested, as intelligent, and as accurate as historians; they have
the viewpoint; the stream, with no visible flow, takes five loads of
this a day when things are going well in La Habana and in ten miles
along the coast it is as clear and blue and unimpressed as it was ever
before the tug hauled out the scow; and the palm fronds of our
victories, the worn light bulbs of our discoveries and the empty condoms
of our great loves float with no significance against one single,
lasting thing--the stream.

So, in the front seat, thinking of the sea and of the country, in a
little while we ran out of Aragon and down to the bank of a sand river,
half a mile wide, of golden-coloured sand, shored by green trees and
broken by islands of timber and in this river the water is underneath
the sand and the game comes down at night and digs in the sand with
sharp-pointed hoofs and water flows in and they drink. We cross this
river and by now it was getting to be afternoon and we passed many
people on the road who were leaving the country ahead where there was a
famine and there were small trees and close brush now beside the road,
and then it commenced to climb and we came into some blue hills, old,
worn, wooded hills with trees like beeches and clusters of huts with
fire smoking and cattle home driven, flocks of sheep and goats and
patches of corn and I said to P.O.M., 'It's like Galicia'.

'Exactly,' she said. 'We've been through three provinces of Spain
to-day.'

'Is it really?' Pop asked.

'There's no difference,' I said. 'Only the buildings. It was like
Navarre in Droopy's country too. The limestone outcropping in the same
way, the way the land lies, the trees along the watercourses and the
springs.'

'It's damned strange how you can love a country,' Pop said.

'You two are very profound fellows,' P.O.M. said. 'But where are we
going to camp?'

'Here,' said Pop. 'As well as any place. We'll just find some water.'

We camped under some trees near three big wells where native women came
for water and, after drawing lots for location, Karl and I hunted in the
dusk around two of the hills across the road above the native village.

'It's all kudu country,' Pop said. 'You're liable to jump one anywhere.'

But we saw nothing but some Masai cattle in the timber and came home, in
the dark, glad of the walk after a day in the car, to find camp up, Pop
and P.O.M. in pyjamas by the fire, and Karl not yet in.

He came in, furious for some reason, no kudu possibly, pale, and gaunt
looking and speaking to nobody.

Later, at the fire, he asked me where we had gone and I said we had
hunted around our hill until our guide had heard them; then cut up to
the top of the hill, down, and across country to camp.

'What do you mean, heard us?'

'He said he heard you. So did M'Cola.'

'I thought we drew lots for where we would hunt.'

'We did,' I said. 'But we didn't know we had gotten around to your side
until we heard you.'

'Did _you_ hear us?'

'I heard something,' I said. 'And when I put my hand up to my ear to
listen the guide said something to M'Cola and M'Cola said, "B'wana". I
said, "What B'wana?" and he said, "B'wana Kabor". That's you. So we
figured we'd come to our limit and went up to the top and came back.'

He said nothing and looked very angry.

'Don't get sore about it,' I said.

'I'm not sore. I'm tired,' he said. I could believe it because of all
people no one can be gentler, more understanding, more self-sacrificing,
than Karl, but the kudu had become an obsession to him and he was not
himself, nor anything like himself.

'He better get one pretty quick,' P.O.M. said when he had gone into his
tent to bathe.

'Did you cut in on his country?' Pop asked me.

'Hell, no,' I said.

'He'll get one where we're going,' Pop said. 'He'll probably get a
fifty-incher.'

'All the better,' I said. 'But by God, I want to get one too.'

'You will, Old Timer,' Pop said. 'I haven't a thought but what you
will.'

'What the hell! We've got ten days.'

'We'll get sable too, you'll see. Once our luck starts to run.'

'How long have you ever had them hunt them in a good country?'

'Three weeks and leave without seeing one. And I've had them get them
the first half day. It's still hunting, the way you hunt a big buck at
home.'

'I love it,' I said. 'But I don't want that guy to beat me. Pop, he's
got the best buff, the best rhino, the best water-buck . . .'

'You beat him on oryx,' Pop said.

'What's an oryx?'

'He'll look damned handsome when you get him home.'

'I'm just kidding.'

'You beat him on impalla, on eland. You've got a first-rate bushbuck.
Your leopard's as good as his. But he'll beat you on anything where
there's luck. He's got damned wonderful luck and he's a good lad. I
think he's off his feed a little.'

'You know how fond I am of him. I like him as well as I like anyone. But
I want to see him have a good time. It's no fun to hunt if we get that
way about it.'

'You'll see. He'll get a kudu at this next camp and he'll be on top of
the wave.'

'I'm just a crabby bastard,' I said.

'Of course you are,' said Pop. 'But why not have a drink?'

'Right,' I said.

Karl came out, quiet, friendly, gentle, and understandingly delicate.

'It will be fine when we get to that new country,' he said.

'It will be swell,' I said.

'Tell me what it's like, Mr. Phillips,' he said to Pop.

'I don't know,' said Pop. 'But they say it's very pleasant hunting.
They're supposed to feed right out in the open. That old Dutchman claims
there are some remarkable heads.'

'I hope you get a sixty-incher, kid,' Karl said to me.

'You'll get a sixty-incher.'

'No,' said Karl. 'Don't kid me. I'll be happy with any kudu.'

'You'll probably get a hell of a one,' Pop said.

'Don't kid me,' Karl said. 'I know how lucky I've been. I would be happy
with any kudu. Any bull at all.'

He was very gentle and he could tell what was in your mind, forgive you
for it, and understand it.

'Good old Karl,' I said, warmed with whisky, understanding, and
sentiment.

'We're having a swell time, aren't we?' Karl said. 'Where's poor old
Mama?'

'I'm here,' said P.O.M. from the shadow. 'I'm one of those quiet
people.'

'By God if you're not,' Pop said. 'But you can puncture the old man
quick enough when he gets started.'

'That's what makes a woman a universal favourite,' P.O.M. told him.
'Give me another compliment, Mr. J.'

'By God, you're brave as a little terrier.' Pop and I had both been
drinking, it seemed.

'That's lovely.' P.O.M. sat far back in her chair, holding her hands
clasped around her mosquito boots. I looked at her, seeing her quilted
blue robe in the firelight now, and the light on her black hair. 'I
love it when you all reach the little terrier stage. Then I know the war
can't be far away. Were either of you gentlemen in the war by any
chance?'

'Not me,' said Pop. 'Your husband, one of the bravest bastards that ever
lived, an extraordinary wing shot and an excellent tracker.'

'Now he's drunk, we get the truth,' I said.

'Let's eat,' said P.O.M. 'I'm really frightfully hungry.'

We were out in the car at daylight, out on to the road and beyond the
village and, passing through a stretch of heavy bush, we came to the
edge of a plain, still misty before the sunrise, where we could see, a
long way off, eland feeding, looking huge and grey in the early morning
light. We stopped the car at the edge of the bush and getting out and
sitting down with the glasses saw there was a herd of kongoni scattered
between us and the eland and with the kongoni a single bull oryx, like a
fat, plum-coloured, Masai donkey with marvellous long, black, straight,
back-slanting horns that showed each time he lifted his head from
feeding.

'You want to go after him?' I asked Karl.

'No. You go on.'

I knew he hated to make a stalk and to shoot in front of people and so I
said, 'All right'. Also I wanted to shoot, selfishly, and Karl was
unselfish. We wanted meat badly.

I walked along the road, not looking toward the game, trying to look
casual, holding the rifle slung straight up and down from the left
shoulder away from the game. They seemed to pay no attention but fed
away steadily. I knew that if I moved toward them they would at once
move off out of range so, when from the tail of my eye I saw the oryx
drop his head to feed again, and, the shot looking possible, I sat down,
slipped my arm through the sling and as he looked up and started to move
off, quartering away, I held for the top of his back and squeezed off.
You do not hear the noise of the shot on game but the slap of the bullet
sounded as he started running across and to the right, the whole plain
back-grounding into moving animals against the rise of the sun, the
rocking-horse canter of the long-legged, grotesque kongoni, the heavy
swinging trot into gallop of the eland, and another oryx I had not seen
before running with the kongoni. This sudden life and panic all made
background for the one I wanted, now trotting, three-quartering away,
his horns held high now and I stood to shoot running, got on him, the
whole animal miniatured in the aperture and I held above his shoulders,
swung ahead and squeezed and he was down, kicking, before the crack of
the bullet striking bone came back. It was a very long and even more
lucky shot that broke a hind leg.

I ran toward him, then slowed to walk up carefully, in order not to be
blown if he jumped and ran; but he was down for good. He had gone down
so suddenly and the bullet had made such a crack as it landed that I was
afraid I had hit him on the horns but when I reached him he was dead
from the first shot behind the shoulders high up in the back and I saw
it was cutting the leg from under him that brought him down. They all
came up and Charo stuck him to make him legal meat.

'Where did you hold on him the second time?' Karl asked.

'Nowhere. A touch above and quite a way ahead and swung with him.'

'It was very pretty,' Dan said.

'By evening,' Pop said, 'he'll tell us that he broke that off leg on
purpose. That's one of his favourite shots, you know. Did you ever hear
him explain it?'

While M'Cola was skinning the head out and Charo was butchering out the
meat, a long, thin Masai with a spear came up, said good morning, and
stood, on one leg, watching the skinning. He spoke to me at some length,
and I called to Pop. The Masai repeated it to Pop.

'He wants to know if you are going to shoot something else,' Pop said.
'He would like some hides but he doesn't care about oryx hide. It is
almost worthless, he says. He wonders if you would like to shoot a
couple of kongoni or an eland. He likes those hides.'

'Tell him on our way back.'

Pop told him solemnly. The Masai shook my hand.

'Tell him he can always find me around Harry's New York Bar,' I said.

The Masai said something else and scratched one leg with the other.

'He says why did you shoot him twice?' Pop asked.

'Tell him in the morning in our tribe we always shoot them twice. Later
in the day we shoot them once. In the evening we are often half shot
ourselves. Tell him he can always find me at the New Stanley or at
Torr's.'

'He says what do you do with the horns?'

'Tell him in our tribe we give the horns to our wealthiest friends. Tell
him it is very exciting and sometimes members of the tribe are chased
across vast spaces with empty pistols. Tell him he can find me in the
book.'

Pop told the Masai something and we shook hands again, parting on a most
excellent basis. Looking across the plain through the mist we could see
some other Masai coming along the road; earth-brown skins, and knee-ing
forward stride and spears thin in the morning light.

Back in the car, the oryx head wrapped in a burlap sack, the meat tied
inside the mudguards, the blood drying, the meat dusting over, the road
of red sand now, the plain gone, the bush again close to the edge of the
road, we came up into some hills and through the little village of
Kibaya where there was a white rest house and a general store and much
farming land. It was here Dan had sat on a haystack one time waiting for
a kudu to feed out into the edge of a patch of mealy-corn and a lion had
stalked Dan while he sat and nearly gotten him. This gave us a strong
historical feeling for the village of Kibaya and as it was still cool
and the sun had not yet burned off the dew from the grass I suggested we
drink a bottle of that silver-paper-necked, yellow-and-black-labelled
German beer with the horseman in armour on it in order that we might
remember the place better and even appreciate it more. This done, full
of historical admiration for Kibaya, we learned the road was possible
ahead, left word for the lorries to follow on to the eastward and headed
on toward the coast and the kudu country.

For a long time, while the sun rose and the day became hot we drove
through what Pop had described, when I asked him what the country was
like to the south, as a million miles of bloody Africa, bush close to
the road that was impenetrable, solid, scrubby-looking undergrowth.

'There are very big elephant in there,' Pop said. 'But it's impossible
to hunt them. That's why they're very big. Simple, isn't it?'

After a long stretch of the million-mile country, the country began to
open out into dry, sandy, bush-bordered prairies that dried into a
typical desert country with occasional patches of bush where there was
water, that Pop said was like the northern frontier province of Kenya.
We watched for gerenuk, that long-necked antelope that resembles a
praying mantis in its way of carrying itself, and for the lesser kudu
that we knew lived in this desert bush, but the sun was high now and we
saw nothing. Finally the road began to lift gradually into the hills
again, low, blue, wooded hills now, with miles of sparse bush, a little
thicker than orchard bush, between, and ahead a pair of high, heavy,
timbered hills that were big enough to be mountains. These were on each
side of the road and as we climbed in the car where the red road
narrowed there was a herd of hundreds of cattle ahead being driven down
to the coast by Somali cattle buyers; the principal buyer walked ahead,
tall, good-looking in white turban and coast clothing, carrying an
umbrella as a symbol of authority. We worked the car through the herd,
finally, and coming out wound our way through pleasant looking bush, up
and out into the open between the two mountains and on, half a mile, to
a mud and thatched village in the open clearing on a little low plateau
beyond the two mountains. Looking back, the mountains looked very fine
and with timber up their slopes, outcroppings of limestone and open
glades and meadows above the timber.

'Is this the place?'

'Yes,' said Dan. 'We will find where the camping place is.'

A very old, worn, and faded black man, with a stubble of white beard, a
farmer, dressed in a dirty once-white cloth gathered at the shoulder in
the manner of a Roman toga, came out from behind one of the mud and
wattle huts, and guided us back down the road and off it to the left to
a very good camp site. He was a very discouraged-looking old man and
after Pop and Dan had talked with him he went off, seeming more
discouraged than before, to bring some guides whose names Dan had
written on a piece of paper as being recommended by a Dutch hunter who
had been here a year ago and who was Dan's great friend.

We took the seats out of the car to use as a table and benches, and
spreading our coats to sit on had a lunch in the deep shade of a big
tree, drank some beer, and slept or read while we waited for the lorries
to come up. Before the lorries arrived the old man came back with the
skinniest, hungriest, most unsuccessful looking of Wanderobos who stood
on one leg, scratched the back of his neck and carried a bow and quiver
of arrows and a spear. Queried as to whether this was the guide whose
name we had, the old man admitted he was not and went off more
discouraged than ever, to get the official guides.

When we woke next the old man was standing with the two official and
highly-clothed-in-khaki guides and two others, quite naked, from the
village. There was a long palaver and the head one of the two
khaki-panted guides showed his credentials, a To Whom It May Concern,
stating the bearer knew the country well and was a reliable boy and
capable tracker. This was signed by so and so, professional hunter. The
khaki-clothed guide referred to this professional hunter as B'wana Simba
and the name infuriated us all.

'Some bloke that killed a lion once,' Pop said.

'Tell him I am B'wana Fisi, the hyena slaughterer,' I told Dan. 'B'wana
Fisi chokes them with his naked hands.'

Dan was telling them something else.

'Ask them if they would like to meet B'wana Hop-Toad, the inventor of
the hoptoads and Mama Tziggi, who owns all these locusts.'

Dan ignored this. It seemed they were discussing money. After
ascertaining their customary daily wage, Pop told them if either of us
killed a kudu the guide would receive fifteen shillings.

'You mean a pound,' said the leading guide.

'They seem to know what they're up to,' Pop said. 'I must say I don't
care for this sportsman in spite of what B'wana Simba says.'

B'wana Simba, by the way, we later found out to be an excellent hunter
with a wonderful reputation on the coast.

'We'll put them into two lots and you draw from them,' Pop suggested,
'one naked one and one with breeches in each lot. I'm all for the naked
savage, myself, as a guide.'

On suggesting to the two testimonial-equipped, breeched guides that they
select an unclothed partner, we found this would not work out. Loud
Mouth, the financial and, now, theatrical, genius who was giving a
gesture-by-gesture reproduction of How B'wana Simba Killed His Last Kudu
interrupted it long enough to state he would only hunt with Abdullah.
Abdullah, the short, thick-nosed, educated one, was His Tracker. They
always hunted together. He himself did not track. He resumed the
pantomime of B'wana Simba and another character known as B'wana Doktor
and the horned beasts.

'We'll take the two savages as one lot and these two Oxonians as the
other,' Pop said.

'I _hate_ that theatrical bastard,' I said.

'He may be marvellous,' Pop said doubtfully. Anyway, you're a tracker,
you know. The old man says the other two are good.'

'Thank you. Go to hell. Will you hold the straws?'

Pop arranged two grass stems in his fist. 'The long one is for David
Garrick and his pal,' he explained. 'The short one is the two nudist
sportsmen.'

'Do you want to draw first?'

'Go ahead,' Karl said.

I drew David Garrick and Abdullah.

'I got the bloody tragedian.'

'He may be very good,' Karl said.

'Do you want to trade?'

'No. He may be a marvel.'

'Now we'll draw for choice of beats. The long straw gets first choice,'
Pop explained.

'Go ahead and draw.'

Karl drew the short one.

'What are the beats?' I asked Pop.

There was a long conversation in which our David simulated the killing
of half a dozen kudu from different types of ambush, surprise, stalks in
the open, and jumping them in the bush.

Finally Pop said, 'It seems there's some sort of a salt-lick where they
come to lick salt and thousands are slain. Then sometimes you just
stroll around the hill there and pot the poor beggars in the open. If
you're feeling frightfully fit, you climb for them and up in the crags
you knock them over as they stroll out to feed.'

'I'll take the salt-lick.'

'Mind you only shoot the very biggest sort,' Pop said.

'When do we start?' Karl asked.

'The salt-lick is supposed to be an early morning-show,' Pop told us.
'But Old Hem might as well have a look at it to-night. It's about five
miles down the road before you start to walk. He'll start first and take
the car. You can start back in the hills any time after the sun gets a
little farther down.'

'What about the Memsahib?' I asked. 'Should she go with me?'

'I don't think it's advisable,' Pop said seriously. 'The fewer people
when you're after kudu the better.'

M'Cola, Theatre Business, Abdullah, and I came back that evening late in
the cool of the night and full of excitement as we came up to the fire.
The dust of the salt-lick had been cut up and printed deep with fresh
kudu tracks and there were several big bull tracks. The blind made a
marvellous ambush and I was as confident and as sure of a shot at kudu
the next morning as I would be sure of a shot at ducks from a good
blind, with a fine stock of decoys out, cold weather, and the certainty
of a flight on.

'It's airtight. It's foolproof. It's even a shame. What's his name,
Booth, Barrett, McCullough--you know who I mean . . .'

'Charles Laughton,' said Pop, pulling on his pipe.

'That's the one. Fred Astaire. Society's hoofer and the world's. He's an
ace. Found the blind and everything. Knew where the salt-lick was. Could
tell which way the wind blew by simply scattering dust. He's a marvel.
B'wana Simba trains 'em, pal. Pop, we have them in the container. It's
only a question of not spoiling the meat and selecting the more rugged
specimens. I'll kill you two to-morrow on that lick. Citizens, I feel
very well.'

'What _have_ you been drinking?'

'Not a damned thing, really. Call Garrick. Tell him I'll put him in the
cinema. Got a part for him. Little thing I thought up on the way home.
It may not work out but I like the plot. Othello or The Moor of Venice.
D'you like it? It's got a wonderful idea. You see this jig we call
Othello falls in love with this girl who's never been around at all so
we call her Desdemona. Like it? They've been after me to write it for
years but I drew the colour line. Let him go out and get a reputation, I
told them. Harry Wills, hell. Paulino beat him. Sharkey beat him.
Dempsey beat Sharkey. Carnera knocked him out. What if nobody saw the
punch? Where the hell were we, Pop? Harry Greb is dead you know.'

'We were just coming into Town,' Pop said. 'Chaps were throwing things
at you and we couldn't find out why.'

'I remember,' P.O.M. said. 'Why didn't you make him draw the colour
line, Mr. J. P.?'

'I was frightfully tired,' Pop said.

'You're very distinguished looking, though,' P.O.M. said. 'What are we
going to do with this goofy?'

'Throw a drink into the brute and see if he'll quiet down.'

'I'm quiet now,' I said. 'But, by God, I feel awfully good about
to-morrow.'

Just then who should come into camp but old Karl with his two naked
savages and his half-size, very devout Mohammedan gun bearer, Charo. In
the firelight old Karl looked a greyish, yellowish white in the face and
he took off his Stetson.

'Well, did you get one?' he asked.

'No. But they're there. What did you do?'

'Walked along a goddamned road. How do they expect to find kudu along a
road with nothing but cattle and huts and people?'

He did not look like himself and I thought he must be ill. But coming in
like a death's head when we had been clowning made me behave badly again
and I said, 'We drew lots, you know'.

'Of course,' he said bitterly. 'We hunted along a road. What would you
expect to see? Does that seem the way to hunt kudu to you?'

'But you'll get one on the salt-lick in the morning,' P.O.M. told him
very cheerfully.

I drank off the glass of whisky and soda and heard my voice say very
cheerfully, 'You'll be sure to get one on the salt-lick in the morning'.

'You're hunting it in the morning,' Karl said.

'No. You're hunting it. I had it to-night. We're changing off. That's
been understood. Isn't it, Pop?'

'Quite,' Pop said. No one was looking at anyone else.

'Have a whisky and soda, Karl,' P.O.M. said.

'All right,' Karl said.

We had one of those quiet meals. In bed in the tent, I said, 'What in
God's name prompted you to say that about him having the lick in the
morning?'

'I don't know. I don't think that's what I meant to say. I got mixed up.
Let's not talk about it.'

'I won the damned thing drawing lots. You can't go against lots. That's
the only way the luck has a chance to even up, ever.'

'Don't let's talk about it.'

'I don't think he's well now and he doesn't feel himself. The damned
things have gotten his goat and he's liable to blow that salt-lick
higher than a kite in the state he's in.'

'Please stop talking about it.'

'I will.'

'Good.'

'Well, we made him feel good anyway.'

'I don't know that we did. Please stop talking about it.'

'I will.'

'Good.'

'Good night,' she said.

'The hell with it,' I said. 'Good night.'

'Good night.'




CHAPTER SEVEN


In the morning Karl and his outfit started for the salt-lick and
Garrick, Abdullah, M'Cola and I crossed the road, angled behind the
village up a dry watercourse and started climbing the mountains in a
mist. We headed up a pebbly, boulder-filled, dry stream bed overgrown
with vines and brush so that, climbing, you walked, stooping, in a steep
tunnel of vines and foliage. I sweated so that I was soaked through my
shirt and undergarments and when we came out on the shoulder of the
mountain and stood, looking down at the bank of clouds quilting over the
entire valley below us, the morning breeze chilled me and I had to put
on my raincoat while we glassed the country. I was too wet with sweat
to sit down and I signed Garrick to keep on going. We went around one
side of the mountain, doubled back on a higher grade and crossed over,
out of the sun that was drying my wet shirt and along the top of a
series of grassy valleys, stopping to search each one thoroughly with
the field glasses. Finally we came to a sort of amphitheatre, a
bowl-like valley of very green grass with a small stream down the middle
and timber along the far side and all the lower edge. We sat in the
shadow against some rocks, out of any breeze, watching with the glasses
as the sun rose and lighted the opposite slopes, seeing two kudu cows
and a calf feed out from the timber, moving with the quickly browsing,
then head lifted, long-staring vigilance of all browsing animals in a
forest. Animals on a plain can see so far that they have confidence and
feed very differently from animals in the woods. We could see the
vertical white stripes on their grey flanks and it was very satisfying
to watch them and to be high in the mountain that early in the morning.
Then, while we watched, there was a boom, like a rockslide. I thought at
first it was a boulder falling, but M'Cola whispered.

'B'wana Kibor! Piga!' We listened for another shot but we did not hear
one and I was sure Karl had his kudu. The cows we were watching had
heard the shot and stood, listening, then went on feeding. But they fed
into the timber. I remembered the old saying of the Indian in camp, 'One
shot, meat. Two shots, maybe. Three shots, heap s--t,' and I got out the
dictionary to translate it for M'Cola. However it came out seemed to
amuse him and he laughed and shook his head. We glassed that valley
until the sun came on to us, then hunted around the other side of the
mountain and in another fine valley saw the place where the other
B'wana, B'wana Doktor he still sounded like, had shot a fine bull kudu,
but a Masai walked down the centre of the valley while we were glassing
it and when I pretended I was going to shoot him Garrick became very
dramatic insisting it was a man, a man, a man!

'Don't shoot men?' I asked him.

'No! No! No!' he said putting his hand to his head. I took the gun down
with great reluctance, clowning for M'Cola who was grinning, and it
very hot now, we walked across a meadow where the grass was knee high
and truly swarming with long, rose-coloured, gauze-winged locusts that
rose in clouds about us, making a whirring like a mowing machine, and
climbing small hills and going down a long steep slope, we made our way
back to camp to find the air of the valley drifting with flying locusts
and Karl already in camp with his kudu.

Passing the skinner's tent he showed me the head which looked, body-less
and neck-less, the cape of hide hanging loose, wet and heavy from where
the base of the skull had been severed from the vertebral column, a very
strange and unfortunate kudu. Only the skin running from the eyes down
to the nostrils, smooth grey and delicately marked with white, and the
big, graceful ears were beautiful. The eyes were already dusty and there
were flies around them and the horns were heavy, coarse, and instead of
spiralling high they made a heavy turn and slanted straight out. It was
a freak head, heavy and ugly.

Pop was sitting under the dining tent smoking and reading.

'Where's Karl?' I asked him.

'In his tent, I think. What did you do?'

'Worked around the hill. Saw a couple of cows.'

'I'm awfully glad you got him,' I told Karl at the mouth of his tent.
'How was it?'

'We were in the blind and they motioned me to keep my head down and then
when I looked up there he was right beside us. He looked huge.'

'We heard you shoot. Where did you hit him?'

'In the leg first, I think. Then we trailed him and finally I hit him a
couple of more times and we got him.'

'I heard only one shot.'

'There were three or four,' Karl said.

'I guess the mountain shut off some if you were gone the other way
trailing him. He's got a heavy beam and a big spread.'

'Thanks,' Karl said. 'I hope you get a lot better one. They said there
was another one but I didn't see him.'

I went back to the dining tent where Pop and P.O.M. were. They did not
seem very elated about the kudu.

'What's the matter with you?' I asked.

'Did you see the head?' P.O.M. asked.

'Sure.'

'It's _awful_ looking,' she said.

'It's a kudu. He's got another one still to go.'

'Charo and the trackers said there was another bull with this one. A big
bull with a wonderful head.'

'That's all right. I'll shoot him.'

'If he ever comes back.'

'It's fine he has one,' P.O.M. said.

'I'll bet he'll get the biggest one ever known, now,' I said.

'I'm sending him down with Dan to the sable country,' Pop said. 'That
was the agreement. The first to kill a kudu to get first crack at the
sable.'

'That's fine.'

'Then as soon as you get your kudu we'll move down there too.'

'_Good._'




PART III

PURSUIT AND FAILURE




CHAPTER ONE


That all seemed a year ago. Now, this afternoon in the car, on the way
out to the twenty-eight-mile salt-lick, the sun on our faces, just
having shot the guinea fowl, having, in the last five days, failed on
the lick where Karl shot his bull, having failed in the hills, the big
hills and the small hills, having failed on the flats, losing a shot the
night before on this lick because of the Austrian's lorry, I knew there
were only two days more to hunt before we must leave. M'Cola knew it
too, and we were hunting together now, with no feeling of superiority on
either side any more, only a shortness of time and our disgust that we
did not know the country and were saddled with these farcical bastards
as guides.

Kamau, the driver, was a Kikuyu, a quiet man of about thirty-five who,
with an old brown tweed coat some shooter had discarded, trousers
heavily patched on the knees and ripped open again, and a very ragged
shirt, managed always to give an impression of great elegance. Kamau was
very modest, quiet, and an excellent driver, and now, as we came out of
the bush country and into an open, scrubby, desert-looking stretch, I
looked at him, whose elegance, achieved with an old coat and a safety
pin, whose modesty, pleasantness and skill I admired so much now, and
thought how, when we first were out, he had very nearly died of fever,
and that if he had died it would have meant nothing to me except that we
would be short a driver; while now whenever or wherever he should die I
would feel badly. Then abandoning the sweet sentiment of the distant and
improbable death of Kamau, I thought what a pleasure it would be to
shoot David Garrick in the behind, just to see the look on his face,
sometime when he was dramatizing a stalk, and, just then, we put up
another flock of guineas. M'Cola handed me the shotgun and I shook my
head. He nodded violently and said, 'Good. Very Good', and I told Kamau
to go on. This confused Garrick who began an oration. Didn't we want
guineas? Those were guineas. The finest kind. I had seen by the
speedometer that we were only about three miles from the salt and had no
desire to spook a bull off of it, by a shot, to frighten him in the way
we had seen the lesser kudu leave the salt when he heard the lorry noise
while we were in the blind.

We left the lorry under some scrubby trees about two miles from the lick
and walked along the sandy road towards the first salt place which was
in the open to the left of the trail. We had gone about a mile keeping
absolutely quiet and walking in single file, Abdullah the educated
tracker leading, then me, M'Cola, and Garrick, when we saw the road was
wet ahead of us. Where the sand was thin over the clay there was a pool
of water and you could see that a heavy rain had drenched it all on
ahead. I did not realize what this meant but Garrick threw his arms
wide, looked up to the sky and bared his teeth in anger.

'It's no good,' M'Cola whispered.

Garrick started to talk in a loud voice.

'Shut up, you bastard,' I said, and put my hand to my mouth. He kept on
talking in above normal tones and I looked up 'shut up' in the
dictionary while he pointed to the sky and the rained-out road. I
couldn't find 'shut up' so I put the back of my hand against his mouth
with some firmness and he closed it in surprise.

''Cola,' I said.

'Yes,' said M'Cola.

'What's the matter?'

'Salt no good.'

'Ah.'

So that was it. I had thought of the rain only as something that made
tracking easy.

'When the rain?' I asked.

'Last night,' M'Cola said.

Garrick started to talk and I placed the back of my hand against his
mouth.

''Cola.'

'Yes.'

'Other salt,' pointing in the direction of the big lick in the woods,
which I knew was a good bit higher because we went very slightly up hill
through the brush to reach it. 'Other salt good?'

'Maybe.'

M'Cola said something in a very low voice to Garrick who seemed deeply
hurt but kept his mouth shut and we went on down the road, walking
around the wet places, to where, sure enough, the deep depression of the
salt-lick was half filled with water. Garrick started to whisper a
speech here but M'Cola shut him up again.

'Come on,' I said, and, M'Cola ahead, we started trailing up the damp,
sandy, ordinarily dry watercourse that led through the trees to the
upper lick.

M'Cola stopped dead, leaned over to look at the damp sand, then
whispered, 'Man', to me. There was the track.

'Shenzi,' he said, which meant a wild man.

We trailed the man, moving slowly through the trees and stalking the
lick carefully, up and into the blind. M'Cola shook his head.

'No good,' he said. 'Come on.'

We went over to the lick. There it was all written plainly. There were
the tracks of three big bull kudu in the moist bank beyond the lick
where they had come to the salt. Then there were the sudden, deep,
knifely-cut tracks where they made a spring when the bow twanged and the
slashing heavily cut prints of their hoofs as they had gone off up the
bank and then, far-spaced, the tracks running into the bush. We trailed
them, all three, but no man's track joined theirs. The bow-man missed
them.

M'Cola said, 'Shenzi!' putting great hate into the word. We picked up
the shenzi's tracks and saw where he had gone on back to the road. We
settled down in the blind and waited there until it was dark and a light
rain began to fall. Nothing came to the salt. In the rain we made our
way back to the lorry. Some wild-man had shot at our kudu and spooked
them away from the salt and now the lick was being ruined.

Kamau had rigged a tent out of a big canvas ground cloth, hung my
mosquito net inside, and set up the canvas cot. M'Cola brought the food
inside the shelter tent.

Garrick and Abdullah built a fire and they, Kamau and M'Cola cooked over
it. They were going to sleep in the lorry. It rained drizzlingly and I
undressed, got into mosquito boots and heavy pyjamas and sat on the cot,
ate a breast of roast guinea hen and drank a couple of tin cups of half
whisky and water.

M'Cola came in, grave, solicitous, and very awkward inside a tent and
took my clothes out from where I had folded them to make a pillow and
folded them again, very un-neatly, and put them under the blankets. He
brought three tins to see if I did not want them opened.

'No.'

'Chai?' he asked.

'The hell with it.'

'No chai?'

'Whisky better.'

'Yes,' he said feelingly. 'Yes.'

'Chai in the morning. Before the sun.'

'Yes, B'wana M'Kumba.'

'You sleep here. Out of the rain.' I pointed to the canvas where the
rain was making the finest sound that we, who live much outside of
houses, ever hear. It was a lovely sound, even though it was bitching
us.

'Yes.'

'Go on. Eat.'

'Yes. No chai?'

'The hell with tea.'

'Whisky?' he asked hopefully.

'Whisky finish.'

'Whisky,' he said confidently.

'All right,' I said. 'Go eat,' and pouring the cup half and half with
water got in under the mosquito bar, found my clothes and again made
them into a pillow, and lying on my side drank the whisky very slowly,
resting on one elbow, then dropped the cup down under the bar on to the
ground, felt under the cot for the Springfield, put the searchlight
beside me in the bed under the blanket, and went to sleep listening to
the rain. I woke when I heard M'Cola come in, make his bed and go to
sleep, and I woke once in the night and heard him sleeping by me; but in
the morning he was up and had made the tea before I was awake.

'Chai,' he said, pulling on my blanket.

'Bloody chai,' I said, sitting up still asleep.

It was a grey, wet morning. The rain had stopped but the mist hung over
the ground and we found the salt-lick rained out and not a track near
it. Then we hunted through the wet scrub on the flat hoping to find a
track in the soaked earth and trail a bull until we could see him. There
were no tracks. We crossed the road and followed the edge of the scrub
around a moor-like open stretch. I hoped we might find the rhino but
while we came on much fresh rhino dung there were no tracks since the
rain. Once we heard tick birds and looking up saw them in jerky flight
above us headed to the northward over the heavy scrub. We made a long
circle through there but found nothing but a fresh hyena track and a cow
kudu track. In a tree M'Cola pointed out a lesser kudu skull with one
beautiful, long, curling horn. We found the other horn below in the
grass and I screwed it back on to its bone base.

'Shenzi,' M'Cola said and imitated a man pulling a bow. The skull was
quite clean but the hollow horns had some damp residue in them, smelled
unbearably foul and, giving no sign of having noticed the stench, I
handed them to Garrick who promptly, without sign gave them to Abdullah.
Abdullah wrinkled the edge of his flat nose and shook his head. They
really smelled abominably. M'Cola and I grinned and Garrick looked
virtuous.

I decided a good idea might be to drive along the road in the car,
watching for kudu, and hunt any likely-looking clearings. We went back
to the car and did this, working several clearings with no luck. By then
the sun was up and the road was becoming populous with travellers, both
white-clothed and naked, and we decided to head for camp. On our way in,
we stopped and stalked the other salt-lick. There was an impalla on it
looking very red where the sun struck his hide in the patches between
the grey trees and there were many kudu tracks. We smoothed them over
and drove on into camp to find a sky full of locusts passing over, going
to the westward, making the sky, as you looked up, seem a pink dither of
flickering passage, flickering like an old cinema film, but pink instead
of grey. P.O.M. and Pop came out and were very disappointed. No rain had
fallen in camp and they had been sure we would have something when we
came in.

'Did my literary pal get off?'

'Yes,' Pop said. 'He's gone into Handeni.'

'He told me all about American women,' P.O.M. said. 'Poor old Poppa, I
was sure you'd get one. Damn the rain.'

'How are American women?'

'He thinks they're terrible.'

'Very sound fellow,' said Pop. 'Tell me just what happened to-day.'

We sat in the shade of the dining tent and I told them.

'A Wanderobo,' Pop said. 'They're frightful shots. Bad luck.'

'I thought it might be one of those travelling sportsmen you see with
their bows slung going along the road. He saw the lick by the road and
trailed up to the other one.'

'Not very likely. They carry those bows and arrows as protection.
They're not hunters.'

'Well, whoever it was put it on us.'

'Bad luck. That, and the rain. I've had scouts out here on both the
hills but they've seen nothing.'

'Well, we're not bitched until to-morrow night. When do we have to
leave?'

'After to-morrow.'

'That bloody savage.'

'I suppose Karl is blasting up the sable down there.'

'We won't be able to get into camp for the horns. Have you heard
anything?'

'No.'

'I'm going to give up smoking for six months for you to get one,' P.O.M.
said. 'I've started already.'

We had lunch and afterwards I went into the tent and lay down and read.
I knew we still had a chance on the lick in the morning and I was not
going to worry about it. But I _was_ worried and I did not want to go to
sleep and wake up feeling dopey so I came out and sat in one of the
canvas chairs under the open dining tent and read somebody's life of
Charles the Second and looked up every once in a while to watch the
locusts. The locusts were exciting to see and it was difficult for me to
take them as a matter of course.

Finally I went to sleep in the chair with my feet on a chop-box and when
I woke there was Garrick, the bastard, wearing a large, very floppy,
black and white ostrich-plume head-dress.

'Go away,' I said in English.

He stood smirking proudly, then turned so I could see the head-dress
from the side.

I saw Pop coming out of his tent with a pipe in his mouth. 'Look what we
have,' I called to him.

He looked, said, 'Christ', and went back into the tent.

'Come on,' I said. 'We'll just ignore it.'

Pop came out, finally, with a book and we took no notice of Garrick's
head-dress at all, sitting and talking, while he posed with it.

'Bastard's been drinking, too,' I said.

'Probably.'

'I can smell it.'

Pop, without looking at him, spoke a few words to Garrick in a very soft
voice.

'What did you tell him?'

'To go and get dressed properly and be ready to start.'

Garrick walked off, his plumes waving.

'Not the moment for his ostrich plumes,' Pop said.

'Some people probably like them.'

'That's it. Start photographing them.'

'Awful,' I said.

'Frightful,' Pop agreed.

'On the last day if we don't get anything, I'm going to shoot Garrick in
the behind. What would that cost me?'

'Might make lots of trouble. If you shoot one, you have to shoot the
other, too.'

'Only Garrick.'

'Better not shoot then. Remember it's me you get into trouble.'

'Joking, Pop.'

Garrick, un-head-dressed and with Abdullah, appeared and Pop spoke with
them.

'They want to hunt around the hill a new way.'

'Splendid. When?'

'Any time now. It looks like rain. You might get going.'

I sent Molo for my boots and a raincoat, M'Cola came out with the
Springfield; and we walked down to the car. It had been heavily cloudy
all day although the sun had come through the clouds in the forenoon for
a time and again at noon. The rains were moving up on us. Now it was
starting to rain and the locusts were no longer flying.

'I'm dopey with sleep,' I told Pop. 'I'm going to have a drink.'

We were standing under the big tree by the cooking fire with the light
rain pattering in the leaves. M'Cola brought the whisky flask and handed
it to me very solemnly.

'Have one?'

'I don't see what harm it can do.'

We both drank and Pop said, 'The hell with them.'

'The hell with them.'

'You may find some tracks.'

'We'll run them out of the country.'

In the car we turned to the right on the road, drove on up past the mud
village and turned off the road to the left on to a red, hard, clay
track that circled the edge of the hills and was close bordered on
either side with trees. It was raining fairly hard now and we drove
slowly. There seemed to be enough sand in the clay to keep the car from
slipping. Suddenly, from the back seat, Abdullah, very excited, told
Kamau to stop. We stopped with a skid, all got out, and walked back.
There was a freshly cut kudu track in the wet clay. It could not have
been made more than five minutes before as it was sharp-edged and the
dirt, that had been picked up by the inside of the hoof, was not yet
softened by the rain.

'Doumi,' Garrick said and threw back his head and spread his arms wide
to show horns that hung back over his withers. 'Kubwa Sana!' Abdullah
agreed it was a bull; a huge bull.

'Come on,' I said.

It was easy tracking and we knew we were close. In rain or snow it is
much easier to come up close to animals and I was sure we were going to
get a shot. We followed the tracks through thick brush and then out into
an open patch. I stopped to wipe the rain off my glasses and blew
through the aperture in the rear sight of the Springfield. It was
raining hard now, and I pulled my hat low down over my eyes to keep my
glasses dry. We skirted the edge of the open patch and then, ahead,
there was a crash and I saw a grey, white-striped animal making off
through the brush. I threw the gun up and M'Cola grabbed my arm,
'Manamouki!' he whispered. It was a cow kudu. But when we came up to
where it had jumped there were no other tracks. The same tracks we had
followed led, logically and with no possibility of doubt, from the road
to that cow.

'Doumi Kubwa Sana!' I said, full of sarcasm and disgust to Garrick and
made a gesture of giant horns flowing back from behind his ears.

'Manamouki Kubwa Sana,' he said very sorrowfully and patiently. 'What an
enormous cow.'

'You lousy ostrich-plumed punk,' I told him in English. 'Manamouki!
Manamouki! Manamouki!'

'Manamouki,' said M'Cola and nodded his head.

I got out the dictionary, couldn't find the words, and made it clear to
M'Cola with signs that we would circle back in a long swing to the road
and see if we could find another track. We circled back in the rain,
getting thoroughly soaked, saw nothing, found the car, and as the rain
lessened and the roads still seemed firm decided to go on until it was
dark. Puffs of cloud hung on the hillside after the rain and the trees
dripped but we saw nothing. Not in the open glades, not in the fields
where the bush thinned, not on the green hillsides. Finally it was dark
and we went back to camp. The Springfield was very wet when we got out
of the car and I told M'Cola to clean it carefully and oil it well. He
said he would and I went on and into the tent where a lantern was
burning, took off my clothes, had a bath in the canvas tub and came out
to the fire comfortable and relaxed in pyjamas, dressing-gown and
mosquito boots.

P.O.M. and Pop were sitting in their chairs by the fire and P.O.M. got
up to make me a whisky and soda.

'M'Cola told me,' Pop said from his chair by the fire.

'A damned big cow,' I told him. 'I nearly busted her. What do you think
about the morning?'

'The lick I suppose. We've scouts out to watch both of these hills. You
remember that old man from the village? He's on a wild-goose chase after
them in some country over beyond the hills. He and the Wanderobo.
They've been gone three days.'

'There's no reason why we shouldn't get one on the lick where Karl shot
his. One day is as good as another.'

'Quite.'

'It's the last damned day though and the lick may be rained out. As soon
as it's wet there's no salt. Just mud.'

'That's it.'

'I'd like to see one.'

'When you do, take your time and make sure of him. Take your time and
kill him.'

'I don't worry about that.'

'Let's talk about something else,' P.O.M. said. 'This makes me too
nervous.'

'I wish we had old Leather Pants,' Pop said. 'God, he was a talker. He
made the old man here talk too. Give us that spiel on modern writers
again.'

'Go to hell.'

'Why don't we have some intellectual life?' P.O.M. asked. 'Why don't you
men ever discuss world topics? Why am I kept in ignorance of everything
that goes on?'

'World's in a hell of a shape,' Pop stated.

'Awful.'

'What's going on in America?'

'Damned if I know! Some sort of Y.M.C.A. show. Starry eyed bastards
spending money that somebody will have to pay. Everybody in our town
quit work to go on relief. Fishermen all turned carpenters. Reverse of
the Bible.'

'How are things in Turkey?'

'Frightful. Took the fezzes away. Hanged any amount of old pals. Ismet's
still around though.'

'Been in France lately?'

'Didn't like it. Gloomy as hell. Been a bad show there just now.'

'By God,' said Pop, 'it must have been if you can believe the papers.'

'When they riot they really riot. Hell, they've got a tradition.'

'Were you in Spain for the revolution?'

'I got there late. Then we waited for two that didn't come. Then we
missed another.'

'Did you see the one in Cuba?'

'From the start.'

'How was it?'

'Beautiful. Then lousy. You couldn't believe how lousy.'

'Stop it,' P.O.M. said. 'I know about those things. I was crouched down
behind a marble-topped table while they were shooting in Havana. They
came by in cars shooting at everybody they saw. I took my drink with me
and I was very proud not to have spilled it or forgotten it. The
children said, "Mother, can we go out in the afternoon to see the
shooting?" They got so worked up about revolution we had to stop
mentioning it. Bumby got so bloodthirsty about Mr. M. he had terrible
dreams.'

'Extraordinary,' Pop said.

'Don't make fun of me. I don't want to just hear about revolutions. All
we see or hear is revolutions. I'm sick of them.'

'The old man must like them.'

'I'm sick of them.'

'You know, I've never seen one,' Pop said.

'They're beautiful. Really. For quite a while. Then they go bad.'

'They're very exciting,' P.O.M. said. 'I'll admit that. But I'm sick of
them. Really, I don't care anything about them.'

'I've been studying them a little.'

'What did you find out?' Pop asked.

'They were all very different but there were some things you could
co-ordinate. I'm going to try to write a study of them.'

'It could be damned interesting.'

'If you have enough material. You need an awful lot of past
performances. It's very hard to get anything true on anything you
haven't seen yourself because the ones that fail have such a bad press
and the winners always lie so. Then you can only really follow anything
in places where you speak the language. That limits you of course.
That's why I would never go to Russia. When you can't overhear it's no
good. All you get are handouts and sight-seeing. Any one who knows a
foreign language in any country is damned liable to lie to you. You get
your good dope always from the people and when you can't talk with
people and can't overhear you don't get anything that's of anything but
journalistic value.'

'You want to knuckle down on your Swahili then.'

'I'm trying to.'

'Even then you can't overhear because they're always talking their own
language.'

'But if I ever write anything about this it will just be landscape
painting until I know something about it. Your first seeing of a country
is a very valuable one. Probably more valuable to yourself than to
anyone else, is the hell of it. But you ought to always write it to try
to get it stated. No matter what you do with it.'

'Most of the damned Safari books are most awful bloody bores.'

'They're terrible.'

'The only one I ever liked was Streeter's. What did he call it?
_Denatured Africa._ He made you feel what it was like. That's the best.'

'I liked Charlie Curtis's. It was very honest and it made a fine
picture.'

'That man Streeter was damned funny though. Do you remember when he shot
the kongoni?'

'It was very funny.'

'I've never read anything, though, that could make you feel about the
country the way we feel about it. They all have Nairobi fast life or
else rot about shooting beasts with horns half an inch longer than
someone else shot. Or muck about danger.'

'I'd like to try to write something about the country and the animals
and what it's like to someone who knows nothing about it.'

'Have a try at it. Can't do any harm. You know I wrote a diary of that
Alaskan trip.'

'I'd love to read it,' P.O.M. said. 'I didn't know you were a writer,
Mr. J. P.'

'No bloody fear,' said Pop. 'If you'd read it, though, I'll send for it.
You know it's just what we did each day and how Alaska looked to an
Englishman from Africa. It'd bore you.'

'Not if you wrote it,' P.O.M. said.

'Little woman's giving us compliments,' Pop said.

'Not me. You.'

'I've read things by him,' she said. 'I want to read what Mr. J. P.
writes.'

'Is the old man really a writer?' Pop asked her. 'I haven't seen
anything to prove it. You're sure he doesn't support you by tracking and
wing shooting?'

'Oh, yes. He writes. When he's going well he's awfully easy to get along
with. But just before he gets going he's frightful. His temper has to go
bad before he can write. When he talks about never writing again I know
he's about to get started.'

'We ought to get more literary conversation from him,' Pop said.
'Leather Breeches was the lad. Give us some literary anecdotes.'

'Well, the last night we were in Paris I'd been out shooting at Ben
Gallagher's in the Sologne the day before and he had a _fermée_, you
know, they put up a low fence while they're out feeding, and shot
rabbits in the morning and in the afternoon we had several drives and
shot pheasants and I shot a chevreuil.'

'That isn't literary.'

'Wait. The last night Joyce and his wife came to dinner and we had a
pheasant and a quarter of the chevreuil with the saddle and Joyce and I
got drunk because we were off for Africa the next day. God, we had a
night.'

'That's a hell of a literary anecdote,' Pop said. 'Who's Joyce?'

'Wonderful guy,' I said. 'Wrote _Ulysses_.'

'Homer wrote _Ulysses_,' Pop said.

'Who wrote _Æschylus_?'

'Homer,' said Pop. 'Don't try to trap me. D'you know many more literary
anecdotes?'

'Ever heard of Pound?'

'No,' said Pop. 'Absolutely no.'

'I know some good ones about Pound.'

'Suppose you and he ate some funny-sounding beast and then got drunk.'

'Several times,' I said.

'Literary life must be awfully jolly. Think I'd make a writer?'

'Rather.'

'We're going to chuck all this,' Pop told P.O.M., 'and both be writers.
Give us another anecdote.'

'Ever heard of George Moore?'

'Chap that wrote "But before I go, George Moore, here's a last long
health to you?"'

'That's him.'

'What about him?'

'He's dead.'

'That's a damned dismal anecdote. You can do better than that.'

'I saw him in a book-shop once.'

'That's better. See how lively he can make them?'

'I went to call on him once in Dublin,' P.O.M. said. 'With Clara Dunn.'

'What happened?'

'He wasn't in.'

'By God. I tell you the literary life's the thing,' Pop said. 'You can't
beat it.'

'I hate Clara Dunn,' I said.

'So do I,' said Pop. 'What did she write?'

'Letters,' I said. 'You know Dos Passos?'

'Never heard of him.'

'He and I used to drink hot kirsch in the winter time.'

'What happened then?'

'People objected, finally.'

'Only writer I ever met was Stewart Edward White,' Pop said. 'Used to
admire his writing no end. Damned good, you know. Then I met him. Didn't
like him.'

'You're coming on,' I said. 'See. There's no trick to a literary
anecdote.'

'Why didn't you like him?' P.O.M. asked.

'Do I have to tell? Isn't the anecdote complete? It's just like the old
man tells them.'

'Go ahead and tell.'

'Too much the old timer about him. Eyes used to vast distances and that
sort of thing. Killed too many bloody lions. No credit kill so many
lions. Gallop 'em, yes. Couldn't kill that many. Lion kill you instead.
Writes damned fine things in _The Saturday Evening Post_ about, what's
the bloke's name, Andy Burnett. Oh, damned fine. Took an awful dislike
to him, though. See him in Nairobi with his eyes used to vast distances.
Wore his oldest clothes in town. Hell of a fine shot, everybody says.'

'Why you're a literary bastard,' I said. 'Look at that for an anecdote.'

'He's marvellous,' P.O.M. said. 'Aren't we ever going to eat?'

'Thought by God we'd eaten,' Pop said. 'Start these anecdotes. No end to
'em.'

After dinner we sat by the fire a little while and then went to bed.
One thing seemed to be on Pop's mind and before I went in the tent he
said, 'After you've waited so long, when you get a shot take it easy.
You're fast enough so you can take your time, remember. Take it easy.'

'All right.'

'I'll have them get you up early.'

'All right. I'm plenty sleepy.'

'Good night, Mr. J. P.,' P.O.M. called from the tent.

'Good night,' Pop said. He moved toward his tent carrying himself with
comic stiffness, walking in the dark as carefully as though he were an
opened bottle.




CHAPTER TWO


Molo waked me by pulling on the blanket in the morning and I was
dressing, dressed, and out washing the sleep out of my eyes before I was
really awake. It was still very dark and I could see Pop's back shadowed
against the fire. I walked over holding the early morning cup of hot tea
and milk in my hand waiting for it to be cool enough to drink.

'Morning,' I said.

'Morning,' he answered in that husky whisper.

'Sleep?'

'Very well. Feeling fit?'

'Sleepy is all.'

I drank the tea and spat the leaves into the fire.

'Tell your bloody fortune with those,' Pop said.

'No fear.'

Breakfast in the dark with a lantern, cool juice-slippery apricots,
hash, hot-centred, brown, and catsup spread, two fried eggs and the warm
promise-keeping coffee. On the third cup Pop, watching, smoking his
pipe, said, 'Too early for me to face it yet.'

'Get you?'

'A little.'

'I'm getting exercise,' I said. 'It doesn't bother me.'

'Bloody anecdotes,' Pop said. 'Memsahib must think we're silly beggars.'

'I'll think up some more.'

'Nothing better than drinking. Don't know why it should make you feel
bad.'

'Are you bad?'

'Not too.'

'Take a spot of Eno's?'

'It's this damned riding in cars.'

'Well, to-day's the day.'

'Remember to take it very easy.'

'You're not worried about that, are you?'

'Just a touch.'

'Don't. It never worries me a minute. Truly.'

'Good. Better get going.'

'Have to make a trip first.'

Standing in front of the canvas circle of the latrine I looked, as each
morning, at that fuzzy blur of stars that the romanticists of
astronomers called the Southern Cross. Each morning at this moment I
observed the Southern Cross in solemn ceremony.

Pop was at the car. M'Cola handed me the Springfield and I got in the
front. The tragedian and his tracker were in the back. M'Cola climbed in
with them.

'Good luck,' Pop said. Someone was coming from towards the tents. It was
P.O.M. in her blue robe and mosquito boots. '_Oh_, good luck,' she said.
'_Please_, good luck.'

I waved and we started, the headlights showing the way to the road.

There was nothing on the salt when we came up to it after leaving the
car about three miles away and making a very careful stalk. Nothing came
all morning. We sat with our heads down in the blind, each covering a
different direction through openings in the thatched withes, and always
I expected the miracle of a bull kudu coming majestic and beautiful
through the open scrub to the grey, dusty opening in the trees where the
salt lick was worn, grooved, and trampled. There were many trails to it
through the trees and on any one a bull might come silently. But nothing
came. When the sun was up and we were warmed after the misty cold of the
morning I settled my rump deeper in the dust and lay back against the
wall of the hole, resting against the small of my back and my shoulders,
and still able to see out through the slit in the blind. Putting the
Springfield across my knees I noticed that there was rust on the barrel.
Slowly I pulled it along and looked at the muzzle. It was freshly brown
with rust.

'The bastard never cleaned it last night after that rain,' I thought,
and, very angry, I lifted the lug and slipped the bolt out. M'Cola was
watching me with his head down. The other two were looking out through
the blind. I held the rifle in one hand for him to look through the
breech and then put the bolt back in and shoved it forward softly,
lowering it with my finger on the trigger so that it was ready to cock
rather than keeping it on the safety.

M'Cola had seen the rusty bore. His face had not changed and I had said
nothing but I was full of contempt and there had been indictment,
evidence, and condemnation without a word being spoken. So we sat there,
he with his head bent so only the bald top showed, me leaning back and
looking out through the slit, and we were no longer partners, no longer
good friends, and nothing came to the salt.

At ten o'clock the breeze, which had come up in the east, began to shift
around and we knew it was no use. Our scent was being scattered in all
directions around the blind as sure to frighten any animals as though we
were revolving a searchlight in the dark. We got up out of the blind and
went over to look in the dust of the lick for tracks. The rain had
moistened it but it was not soaked and we saw several kudu tracks,
probably made early in the night and one big bull track, long, narrow,
heart-shaped; clearly, deeply cut.

We took the track and followed it on the damp reddish earth for two
hours in thick bush that was like second-growth timber at home. Finally
we had to leave it in stuff we could not move through. All this time I
was angry about the uncleaned rifle and yet happy and eager with
anticipation that we might jump the bull and get a snap at him in the
brush. But we did not see him and now, in the big heat of noon, we made
three long circles around some hills and finally came out into a meadow
full of little, humpy Masai cattle and, leaving all shade behind,
trailed back across the open country under the noon sun to the car.

Kamau, sitting in the car, had seen a kudu bull pass a hundred yards
away. He was headed toward the salt-lick at about nine o'clock when the
wind began to be tricky, had evidently caught our scent and gone back
into the hills. Tired, sweating, and feeling more sunk than angry now, I
got in beside Kamau and we headed the car toward camp. There was only
one evening left now, and no reason to expect we would have any better
luck than we were having. As we came to camp, and the shade of the heavy
trees, cool as a pool, I took the bolt out of the Springfield and handed
the rifle, boltless, to M'Cola without speaking or looking at him. The
bolt I tossed inside the opening of our tent on to my cot.

Pop and P.O.M. were sitting under the dining tent.

'No luck?' Pop asked gently.

'Not a damn bit. Bull went by the car headed toward the salt. Must have
spooked off. We hunted all over hell.'

'Didn't you see anything?' P.O.M. asked. 'Once we thought we heard you
shoot.'

'That was Garrick shooting his mouth off. Did the scouts get anything?'

'Not a thing. We've been watching both hills.'

'Hear from Karl?'

'Not a word.'

'I'd like to have seen one,' I said. I was tired out and slipping into
bitterness fast. 'God damn them. What the hell did he have to blow that
lick to hell for the first morning and gut-shoot a lousy bull and chase
him all over the son-of-a-bitching country spooking it to holy bloody
hell?'

'Bastards,' said P.O.M., staying with me in my unreasonableness.
'Sonsabitches.'

'You're a good girl,' I said. 'I'm all right. Or I will be.'

'It's been awful,' she said. 'Poor old Poppa.'

'You have a drink,' Pop said. 'That's what you need.'

'I've hunted them hard, Pop. I swear to God I have. I've enjoyed it and
I haven't worried up until to-day. I was so damned sure. Those damned
tracks all the time--what if I never see one? How do I know we can ever
get back here again?'

'You'll be back,' Pop said. 'You don't have to worry about that. Go
ahead. Drink it.'

'I'm just a lousy belly-aching bastard but I swear they haven't gotten
on my nerves until to-day.'

'Belly-ache,' said Pop. 'Better to get it out.'

'What about lunch?' asked P.O.M. 'Aren't you frightfully hungry?'

'The hell with lunch. The thing is, Pop, we've never seen them on the
salt in the evening and we've never seen a bull in the hills. I've only
got to-night. It looks washed up. Three times I've had them cold and
Karl and the Austrian and the Wanderobo beat us.'

'We're not beaten,' said Pop. 'Drink another one of those.'

We had lunch, a very good lunch, and it was just over when Kati came and
said there was someone to see Pop. We could see their shadows on the
tent fly, then they came around to the front of the tent. It was the old
man of the first day, the old farmer, but now he was gotten up as a
hunter and carried a long bow and a sealed quiver of arrows.

He looked older, more disreputable and tireder than ever and his get-up
was obviously a disguise. With him was the skinny, dirty, Wanderobo with
the slit and curled up ears who stood on one leg and scratched the back
of his knee with his toes. His head was on one side and he had a narrow,
foolish, and depraved-looking face.

The old man was talking earnestly to Pop, looking him in the eye and
speaking slowly, without gestures.

'What's he done? Gotten himself up like that to get some of the scout
money?' I asked.

'Wait,' Pop said.

'Look at the pair of them,' I said. 'That's goofy Wanderobo and that
lousy old fake. What's he say, Pop?'

'He hasn't finished,' Pop said.

Finally the old man was finished and he stood there leaning on his
property bow. They both looked very tired but I remember thinking they
looked a couple of disgusting fakes.

'He says,' Pop began, 'they have found a country where there are kudu
and sable. He has been there three days. They know where there is a big
kudu bull and he has a man watching him now.'

'Do you believe it?' I could feel the liquor and the fatigue drain out
of me and the excitement come in.

'God knows,' said Pop.

'How far away is the country?'

'One day's march. I suppose that's three or four hours in the car if the
car can go.'

'Does he think the car can get in?'

'None ever has been in but he thinks you can make it.'

'When did they leave the man watching the kudu?'

'This morning.'

'Where are the sable?'

'There in the hills.'

'How do we get in?'

'I can't make out except that you cross the plain, go around that
mountain and then south. He says no one has ever hunted there. He hunted
there when he was young.'

'Do you believe it?'

'Of course natives lie like hell, but he tells it very straight.'

'Let's go.'

'You'd better start right away. Go as far as you can in the car and then
use it for a base and hunt on from there. The Memsahib and I will break
camp in the morning, move the outfit and go on to where Dan and Mr. T.
are. Once the outfit is over that black cotton stretch we're all right
if the rain catches us. You come on and join us. If you're caught we can
always send the car back by Kandoa, if worst comes, and the lorries down
to Tanga and around.'

'Don't you want to come?'

'No. You're better off alone on a show like this. The more people the
less game you'll see. You should hunt kudu alone. I'll move the outfit
and look after the little Memsahib.'

'All right,' I said. 'And I don't have to take Garrick or Abdullah?'

'Hell, no. Take M'Cola, Kamau and these two. I'll tell Molo to pack your
things. Go light as hell.'

'God damn it, Pop. Do you think it could be true?'

'Maybe,' said Pop. 'We have to play it.'

'How do you say sable?'

'Tarahalla.'

'Valhalla, I can remember. Do the females have horns?'

'Sure, but you can't make a mistake. The bull is black and they're
brown. You can't go wrong.'

'Has M'Cola ever seen one?'

'I don't think so. You've got four on your licence. Any time you can
better one, go ahead.'

'Are they hard to kill?'

'They're tough. They're not like a kudu. If you've got one down be
careful how you walk up to him.'

'What about time?'

'We've got to get out. Make it back to-morrow night if you can. Use your
own judgment. I think this is the turning point. You'll get a kudu.'

'Do you know what it's like?' I said. 'It's just like when we were kids
and we heard about a river no one had ever fished out on the huckleberry
plain beyond the Sturgeon and the Pigeon.'

'How did the river turn out?'

'Listen. We had a hell of a time to get in and the night we got there,
just before dark, and saw it, there was a deep pool and a long straight
stretch and the water so cold you couldn't keep your hand in it and I
threw a cigarette butt in and a big trout hit it and they kept snapping
it up and spitting it out as it floated until it went to pieces.'

'Big trout?'

'The biggest kind.'

'God save us,' said Pop. 'What did you do then?'

'Rigged up my rod and made a cast and it was dark, and there was a
nighthawk swooping around and it was cold as a bastard and then I was
fast to three fish the second the flies hit the water.'

'Did you land them?'

'The three of them.'

'You damned liar.'

'I swear to God.'

'I believe you. Tell me the rest when you come back. Were they big
trout?'

'The biggest bloody kind.'

'God save us,' said Pop. 'You're going to get a kudu. Get started.'

In the tent I found P.O.M. and told her.

'Not really?'

'Yes.'

'Hurry up,' she said. 'Don't talk. Get started.'

I found raincoat, extra boots, socks, bathrobe, bottle of quinine
tablets, citronella, note book, a pencil, my solids, the cameras, the
emergency kit, knife, matches, extra shirt and undershirt, a book, two
candles, money, the flask . . .

'What else?'

'Have you got soap? Take a comb and a towel. Got handkerchiefs?'

'All right.'

Molo had everything packed in a rucksack and I found my field glasses,
M'Cola taking Pop's big field glasses, a canteen with water and Kati
sending a chop-box with food. 'Take plenty of beer,' Pop said. 'You can
leave it in the car. We're short on whisky but there's a bottle.'

'How will that leave you?'

'All right. There's more at the other camp. We sent two bottles on with
Mr. K.'

'I'll only need the flask,' I said. 'We'll split the bottle.'

'Take plenty of beer then. There's any amount of it.'

'What's the bastard doing?' I said, pointing at Garrick who was getting
into the car.

'He says you and M'Cola wont be able to talk with the natives there.
You'll have to have some one to interpret.'

'He's poison.'

'You _will_ need someone to interpret whatever they speak into Swahili.'

'All right. But tell him he's not running the show and to keep his
bloody mouth shut.'

'We'll go to the top of the hill with you,' Pop said and we started off,
the Wanderobo hanging to the side of the car. 'Going to pick the old man
up in the village.'

Everyone in camp was out to watch us go.

'Have we plenty of salt?'

'Yes.'

Now we were standing by the car on the road in the village waiting for
the old man and Garrick to come back from their huts. It was early
afternoon and the sky was clouding over and I was looking at P.O.M.,
very desirable, cool, and neat-looking in her khaki and her boots, her
Stetson on one side of her head, and at Pop, big, thick, in the faded
corduroy sleeveless jacket that was almost white now from washing and
the sun.

'You be a good girl.'

'Don't ever worry. I wish I could go.'

'It's a one-man show,' Pop said. 'You want to get in fast and do the
dirty and get out fast. You've a big load as it is.'

The old man appeared and got into the back of the car with M'Cola who
was wearing my old khaki sleeveless, quail-shooting coat.

'M'Cola's got the old man's coat,' Pop said.

'He likes to carry things in the game pockets,' I said.

M'Cola saw we were talking about him. I had forgotten about the
uncleaned rifle. Now I remembered it and said to Pop, 'Ask him where he
got the new coat'.

M'Cola grinned and said something.

'He says it is his property.'

I grinned at him and he shook his old bald head and it was understood
that I had said nothing about the rifle.

'Where's that bastard Garrick?' I asked.

Finally he came with his blanket and got in with M'Cola and the old man
behind. The Wanderobo sat with me in front beside Kamau.

'That's a lovely-looking friend you have,' P.O.M. said. 'You be good
too.'

I kissed her good-bye and we whispered something.

'Billing and cooing,' Pop said. 'Disgusting.'

'Good-bye, you old bastard.'

'Good-bye, you damned bullfighter.'

'Good-bye, sweet.'

'Good-bye and good luck.'

'You've plenty of petrol and we'll leave some here,' Pop called.

I waved and we were starting down hill through the village on a narrow
track that led down and on to the scrubby dry plain that spread out
below the two great blue hills.

I looked back as we went down the hill and saw the two figures, the tall
thick one and the small neat one, each wearing big Stetson hats,
silhouetted on the road as they walked back toward camp, then I looked
ahead at the dried-up, scrubby plain.




PART IV

PURSUIT AS HAPPINESS




CHAPTER ONE


The road was only a track and the plain was very discouraging to see. As
we went on we saw a few thin Grant's gazelles showing white against the
burnt yellow of the grass and the grey trees. My exhilaration died with
the stretching out of this plain, the typical poor game country, and it
all began to seem very impossible and romantic and quite untrue. The
Wanderobo had a very strong odour and I looked at the way the lobes of
his ear were stretched and then neatly wrapped on themselves and at his
strange un-negroid, thin-lipped face. When he saw me studying his face
he smiled pleasantly and scratched his chest. I looked around at the
back of the car. M'Cola was asleep. Garrick was sitting straight up,
dramatizing his awakeness, and the old man was trying to see the road.

By now there was no more road, only a cattle track, but we were coming
to the edge of the plain. Then the plain was behind us and ahead there
were big trees and we were entering a country the loveliest that I had
seen in Africa. The grass was green and smooth, short as a meadow that
has been mown and is newly grown, and the trees were big, high-trunked,
and old with no undergrowth but only the smooth green of the turf like a
deer park and we drove on through shade and patches of sunlight
following a faint trail the Wanderobo pointed out. I could not believe
we had suddenly come to any such wonderful country. It was a country to
wake from, happy to have had the dream and, seeing if it would clown
away, I reached up and touched the Wanderobo's ear. He jumped and Kamau
snickered. M'Cola nudged me from the back seat and pointed and there,
standing in an open space between the trees, his head up, staring at us,
the bristles on his back erect, long, thick, white tusks upcurving, his
eyes showing bright, was a very large wart-hog boar watching us from
less than twenty yards. I motioned to Kamau to stop and we sat looking
at him and he at us. I put the rifle up and sighted on his chest. He
watched and did not move. Then I motioned to Kamau to throw in the
clutch and we went on and made a curve to the right and left the
wart-hog, who had never moved, nor showed any fright at seeing us.

I could see that Kamau was excited and, looking back, M'Cola nodded his
head up and down in agreement. None of us had ever seen a wart-hog that
would not bolt off, fast-trotting, tail in air. This was a virgin
country, an un-hunted pocket in the million miles of bloody Africa. I
was ready to stop and make camp anywhere.

This was the finest country I had seen but we went on, winding along
through the big trees over the softly rolling grass. Then ahead and to
the right we saw the high stockade of a Masai village. It was a very
large village and out of it came running long-legged, brown,
smooth-moving men who all seemed to be of the same age and who wore
their hair in a heavy club-like queue that swung against their
shoulders as they ran. They came up to the car and surrounded it, all
laughing and smiling and talking. They all were tall, their teeth were
white and good, and their hair was stained a red brown and arranged in a
looped fringe on their foreheads. They carried spears and they were very
handsome and extremely jolly, not sullen, nor contemptuous like the
northern Masai, and they wanted to know what we were going to do. The
Wanderobo evidently said we were hunting kudu and were in a hurry. They
had the car surrounded so we could not move. One said something and
three or four others joined in and Kamau explained to me that they had
seen two kudu bulls go along the trail in the afternoon.

'It can't be true,' I said to myself. 'It can't be.'

I told Kamau to start and slowly we pushed through them, they all
laughing and trying to stop the car, making it all but run over them.
They were the tallest, best-built, handsomest people I had ever seen and
the first truly light-hearted happy people I had seen in Africa.
Finally, when we were moving, they started to run beside the car smiling
and laughing and showing how easily they could run and then, as the
going was better, up the smooth valley of a stream, it became a contest
and one after another dropped out of the running, waving and smiling as
they left until there were only two still running with us, the finest
runners of the lot, who kept pace easily with the car as they moved
long-legged, smoothly, loosely, and with pride. They were running too,
at the pace of a fast miler, and carrying their spears as well. Then we
had to turn to the right and climb out of the putting-green smoothness
of the valley into a rolling meadow and, as we slowed, climbing in first
gear, the whole pack came up again, laughing and trying not to seem
winded. We went through a little knot of brush and a small rabbit
started out, zigzagging wildly and all the Masai behind now in a mad
sprint. They caught the rabbit and the tallest runner came up with him
to the car and handed him to me. I held him and could feel the thumping
of his heart through the soft, warm, furry body, and as I stroked him
the Masai patted my arm. Holding him by the ears I handed him back. No,
no, he was mine. He was a present. I handed him to M'Cola. M'Cola did
not take him seriously and handed him to one of the Masai. We were
moving and they were running again now. The Masai stooped and put the
rabbit on the ground and as he ran free they all laughed. M'Cola shook
his head. We were all very impressed by these Masai.

'Good Masai,' M'Cola said, very moved. 'Masai many cattle. Masai no kill
to eat. Masai kill man.'

The Wanderobo patted himself on the chest.

'Wanderobo . . . Masai,' he said, very proudly, claiming kin. His ears
were curled in the same way theirs were. Seeing them running and so
damned handsome and so happy made us all happy. I had never seen such
quick disinterested friendliness, nor such fine-looking people.

'_Good_ Masai,' M'Cola repeated, nodding his head emphatically. '_Good,
good_ Masai.' Only Garrick seemed impressed in a different way. For all
his khaki clothes and his letter from B'wana Simba, I believe these
Masai frightened him in a very old place. They were our friends, not
his. They certainly were our friends though. They had that attitude that
makes brothers, that unexpressed but instant and complete acceptance
that you must be Masai wherever it is you come from. That attitude you
only get from the best of the English, the best of the Hungarians and
the very best Spaniards; the thing that used to be the most clear
distinction of nobility when there was nobility. It is an ignorant
attitude and the people who have it do not survive, but very few
pleasanter things ever happen to you than the encountering of it.

So now there were only the two of them left again, running, and it was
hard going and the machine was beating them. They were still running
well and still loose and long but the machine was a cruel pacemaker. So
I told Kamau to speed it up and get it over with because a sudden burst
of speed was not the humiliation of a steady using. They sprinted, were
beaten, laughed, and then we were leaning out, waving, and they stood
leaning on their spears and waved. We were still great friends but now
we were alone again and there was no track, only the general direction
to follow around clumps of trees and along the run of this green valley.

After a little the trees grew closer and we left the idyllic country
behind and now were picking our way along a faint trail through thick
second-growth. Sometimes we came to a dead halt and had to get out and
pull a log out of the way or cut a tree that blocked the body of the
car. Sometimes we had to back out of bush and look for a way to circle
around and come upon the trail again, chopping our way through with the
long brush knives that are called pangas. The Wanderobo was a pitiful
chopper and Garrick was little better. M'Cola did everything well in
which a knife was used and he swung a panga with a fast yet heavy and
vindictive stroke. I used it badly. There was too much wrist in it to
learn it quickly; your wrist tired and the blade seemed to have a weight
it did not have. I wished that I had a Michigan double-bitted axe, honed
razor-sharp, to chop with instead of this sabring of trees.

Chopping through when we were stopped, avoiding all we could, Kamau
driving with intelligence and a sound feeling for the country, we came
through the difficult going and out into another open-meadow stretch and
could see a range of hills off to our right. But here there had been a
recent heavy rain and we had to be very careful about the low parts of
the meadow where the tyres cut in through the turf to mud and spun in
the slick greasiness. We cut brush and shovelled out twice and then,
having learned not to trust any low part, we skirted the high edge of
the meadow and then were in timber again. As we came out, after several
long circles in the woods to find places where we could get the car
through, we were on the bank of a stream, where there was a sort of
brushy bridging across the bed built like a beaver dam and evidently
designed to hold back the water. On the other side was a
thorn-brush-fenced cornfield, a steep, stump-scattered bank with corn
planted all over it and some abandoned looking corrals or
thorn-bush-fenced enclosures with mud and stick buildings and to the
right there were cone-shaped grass huts projecting above a heavy thorn
fence. We all got out, for this stream was a problem, and, on the other
side, the only place we could get up the bank led through the
stump-filled maize field.

The old man said the rain had come that day. There had been no water
going over the brushy dam when they had passed that morning. I was
feeling fairly depressed. Here we had come through a beautiful country
of virgin timber where kudu had been once seen walking along the trail
to end up stuck on the bank of a little creek in someone's cornfield. I
had not expected any cornfield and I resented it. I thought we would
have to get permission to drive through the maize, provided we could
make it across the stream and up the bank and I took off my shoes and
waded across the stream to test it underfoot. The brush and saplings on
the bottom were packed hard and firm and I was sure we could cross if we
took it fairly fast. M'Cola and Kamau agreed and we walked up the bank
to see how it would be. The mud of the bank was soft but there was dry
earth underneath and I figured we could shovel our way up if we could
get through the stumps. But we would need to unload before we tried it.

Coming toward us, from the direction of the huts, were two men and a
boy. I said 'Jambo', as they came up. They answered 'Jambo', and then
the old man and the Wanderobo talked with them. M'Cola shook his head at
me. He did not understand a word. I thought we were asking permission
to go through the corn. When the old man finished talking the two men
came closer and we shook hands.

They looked like no negroes I had ever seen. Their faces were a grey
brown, the oldest looked to be about fifty, had thin lips, an almost
Grecian nose, rather high cheekbones, and large, intelligent eyes. He
had great poise and dignity and seemed to be very intelligent. The
younger man had the same cast of features and I took him for a younger
brother. He looked about thirty-five. The boy was as pretty as a girl
and looked rather shy and stupid. I had thought he was a girl from his
face for an instant when he first came up, as they all wore a sort of
Roman toga of unbleached muslin gathered at the shoulder that revealed
no line of their bodies.

They were talking with the old man, who, now that I looked at him
standing with them, seemed to bear a sort of wrinkled and degenerate
resemblance to the classic-featured owner of the shamba; just as the
Wanderobo-Masai was a shrivelled caricature of the handsome Masai we had
met in the forest.

Then we all went down to the stream and Kamau and I rigged ropes around
the tyres to act as chains while the Roman elder and the rest unloaded
the car and carried the heaviest things up the steep bank. Then we
crossed in a wild, water-throwing smash and, all pushing heavily, made
it halfway up the bank before we stuck. We chopped and dug out and
finally made it to the top of the bank but ahead was that maize field
and I could not figure where we were to go from there.

'Where do we go?' I asked the Roman elder.

They did not understand Garrick's interpreting and the old man made the
question clear.

The Roman pointed toward the heavy thorn-bush fence to the left at the
edge of the woods.

'We can't get through there in the car.'

'Campi,' said M'Cola, meaning we were going to camp there.

'Hell of a place,' I said.

'Campi,' M'Cola said firmly and they all nodded.

'Campi! Campi!' said the old man.

'There we camp,' Garrick announced pompously.

'You go to hell,' I told him cheerfully.

I walked toward the camp site with the Roman who was talking steadily in
a language I could not understand a word of. M'Cola was with me and the
others were loading and following with the car. I was remembering that I
had read you must never camp in abandoned native quarters because of
ticks and other hazards and I was preparing to hold out against this
camp. We entered a break in the thorn-bush fence and inside was a
building of logs and saplings stuck in the ground and crossed with
branches. It looked like a big chicken coop. The Roman made us free of
this and of the enclosure with a wave of his hand and kept on talking.

'Bugs,' I said to M'Cola in Swahili, speaking with strong disapproval.

'No,' he said, dismissing the idea. 'No bugs.'

'Bad bugs. Many bugs. Sickness.'

'No bugs,' he said firmly.

The no-bugs had it and with the Roman talking steadily, I hoped on some
congenial topic, the car came up, stopped under a huge tree about fifty
yards from the thorn-bush fence and they all commenced carrying the
necessities in for the making of camp. My ground-sheet tent was slung
between a tree and one side of the chicken coop and I sat down on a
petrol case to discuss the shooting situation with the Roman, the old
man, and Garrick, while Kamau and M'Cola fixed up a camp and the
Wanderobo-Masai stood on one leg and let his mouth hang open.

'Where were kudu?'

'Back there,' waving his arm.

'Big ones?'

Arms spread to show hugeness of horns and a torrent from the Roman.

Me, dictionary-ing heavily, 'Where was the one they were watching?'

No results on this but a long speech from the Roman which I took to mean
they were watching them all.

It was late afternoon now and the sky was heavy with clouds. I was wet
to the waist and my socks were mud soaked. Also I was sweating from
pushing on the car and from chopping.

'When do we start?' I asked.

'To-morrow,' Garrick answered without bothering to question the Roman.

'No,' I said. 'To-night.'

'To-morrow,' Garrick said. 'Late now. One hour light.' He showed me one
hour on my watch.

I dictionaried. 'Hunt to-night. Last hour best hour.'

Garrick implied that the kudu were too far away. That it was impossible
to hunt and return, all this with gestures, 'Hunt to-morrow'.

'You bastard,' I said in English. All this time the Roman and the old
man had been standing saying nothing. I shivered. It was cold with the
sun under the clouds in spite of the heaviness of the air after rain.

'Old man,' I said.

'Yes, Master,' said the old man. Dictionary-ing carefully, I said, 'Hunt
kudu to-night. Last hour best hour. Kudu close?'

'Maybe.'

'Hunt now?'

They talked together.

'Hunt to-morrow,' Garrick put in.

'Shut up, you actor,' I said. 'Old man. Little hunt now?'

'Yes,' said the old man and Roman nodded. 'Little while.'

'Good,' I said, and went to find a shirt and undershirt and a pair of
socks.

'Hunt now,' I told M'Cola.

'Good,' he said. 'M'uzuri.'

With the clean feeling of dry shirt, fresh socks and a change of boots I
sat on the petrol case and drank a whisky and water while I waited for
the Roman to come back. I felt certain I was going to have a shot at
kudu and I wanted to take the edge off so I would not be nervous. Also I
wanted not to catch a cold. Also I wanted the whisky for itself,
because I loved the taste of it and because, being as happy as I could
be, it made me feel even better.

I saw the Roman coming and I pulled the zippers up on my boots, checked
the cartridges in the magazine of the Springfield, took off the
foresight protector and blew through the rear aperture. Then I drank
what was left in the tin cup that was on the ground by the box and stood
up, checking that I had a pair of handkerchiefs in my shirt pockets.

M'Cola came carrying his knife and Pop's big glasses.

'You stay here,' I said to Garrick. He did not mind. He thought we were
silly to go out so late and he was glad to prove us wrong. The Wanderobo
wanted to go.

'That's plenty,' I said, and waved the old man back and we started out
of the corral with the Roman ahead, carrying a spear, then me, then
M'Cola with glasses and the Mannlicher, full of solids, and last the
Wanderobo-Masai with another spear.

It was after five when we struck off across the maize field and down to
the stream, crossing where it narrowed in a high grass a hundred yards
above the dam and then, walking slowly and carefully, went up the grassy
bank on the far side, getting soaked to the waist as we stooped going
through the wet grass and bracken. We had not been gone ten minutes and
were moving carefully up the stream bank, when, without warning, the
Roman grabbed my arm and pulled me bodily down to the ground as he
crouched; me pulling back the bolt to cock the rifle as I dropped.
Holding his breath he pointed and across the stream on the far bank at
the edge of the trees was a large, grey animal, white stripes showing on
his flanks and huge horns curling back from his head as he stood,
broadside to us, head up, seeming to be listening. I raised the rifle,
but there was a bush in the way of the shot. I could not shoot over the
bush without standing.

'Piga,' whispered M'Cola. I shook my finger and commenced to crawl
forward to be clear of the bush, sick afraid the bull would jump while I
was trying to make the shot certain, but remembering Pop's 'Take your
time'. When I saw I was clear I got on one knee, saw the bull through
the aperture, marvelling at how big he looked, and then, remembering not
to have it matter, that it was the same as any other shot, I saw the
bead centred exactly where it should be just below the top of the
shoulder and squeezed off. At the roar he jumped and was going into the
brush, but I knew I had hit him. I shot at a show of grey between the
trees as he went in and M'Cola was shouting, 'Piga! Piga!' meaning 'He's
hit! He's hit!' and the Roman was slapping me on the shoulder, then he
had his toga up around his neck and was running naked, and the four of
us were running now, full speed, like hounds, splashing across the
stream, tearing up the bank, the Roman ahead, crashing naked through the
brush, then stooping and holding up a leaf with bright blood, slamming
me on the back, M'Cola saying, 'Damu! Damu!' (blood, blood), then the
deep cut tracks off to the right, me reloading, we all trailing in a
dead run, it almost dark in the timber, the Roman, confused a moment by
the trail, making a cast off to the right, then picking up blood once
more, then pulling me down again with a jerk on my arm and none of us
breathing as we saw him standing in a clearing a hundred yards ahead,
looking to me hard-hit and looking back, wide ears spread, big, grey,
white-striped, his horns a marvel, as he looked straight toward us over
his shoulder. I thought I must make absolutely sure this time, now, with
the dark coming and I held my breath and shot him a touch behind the
fore-shoulder. We heard the bullet smack and saw him buck heavily with
the shot. M'Cola shouted, 'Piga! Piga! Piga!' as he went out of sight
and as we ran again, like hounds, we almost fell over something. It was
a huge, beautiful kudu bull, stone-dead, on his side, his horns in great
dark spirals, widespread and unbelievable as he lay dead five yards from
where we stood when I had just that instant shot. I looked at him, big,
long-legged, a smooth grey with the white stripes and the great curling,
sweeping horns, brown as walnut meats, and ivory pointed, at the big
ears and the great, lovely heavy-maned neck, the white chevron between
his eyes and the white of his muzzle and I stooped over and touched him
to try to believe it. He was lying on the side where the bullet had gone
in and there was not a mark on him and he smelled sweet and lovely like
the breath of cattle and the odour of thyme after rain.

Then the Roman had his arms around my neck and M'Cola was shouting in a
strange high sing-song voice and Wanderobo-Masai kept slapping me on the
shoulder and jumping up and down and then one after the other they all
shook hands in a strange way that I had never known in which they took
your thumb in their fist and held it and shook it and pulled it and held
it again, while they looked you in the eyes, fiercely.

We all looked at him and M'Cola knelt and traced the curve of his horns
with his finger and measured the spread with his arms and kept crooning,
'Oo-oo-eee-eee', making small high noises of ecstasy and stroking the
kudu's muzzle and his mane.

I slapped the Roman on the back and we went through the thumb-pulling
again; me pulling his thumb too. I embraced the Wanderobo-Masai and he,
after a thumb-pulling of great intensity and feeling, slapped his chest
and said very proudly, 'Wanderobo-Masai wonderful guide'.

'Wanderobo-Masai wonderful Masai,' I said.

M'Cola kept shaking his head, looking at the kudu and making the strange
small noises. Then he said, 'Doumi, Doumi, Doumi! B'wana Kabor Kidogo,
Kidogo'. Meaning this was a bull of bulls. That Karl's had been a little
one, a nothing.

We all knew we had killed the other kudu that I had mistaken for this
one, while this first one was lying dead from the first shot, and it
seemed of no importance beside the miracle of this kudu. But I wanted to
see the other.

'Come on, kudu,' I said.

'He's dead,' said M'Cola. 'Kufa!'

'Come on.'

'This one best.'

'Come on.'

'Measure,' M'Cola pleaded. I ran the steel tape around the curve of one
horn, M'Cola holding it down. It was well over fifty inches. M'Cola
looked at me anxiously.

'Big! Big!' I said. 'Twice as big as B'wana Kabor.'

'Eee-eee,' he crooned.

'Come on,' I said. The Roman was off already.

We cut for where we saw the bull when I shot and there were the tracks
with blood breast high on the leaves in the brush from the start. In a
hundred yards we came on him absolutely dead. He was not quite as big as
the first bull. The horns were as long, but narrower, but he was as
beautiful, and he lay on his side, bending down the brush where he fell.

We all shook hands again, using the thumb which evidently denoted
extreme emotion.

'This askari,' M'Cola explained. This bull was the policeman or
bodyguard for the bigger one. He had evidently been in the timber when
we had seen the first bull, had run with him, and had looked back to see
why the big bull did not follow.

I wanted pictures and told M'Cola to go back to camp with the Roman and
bring the two cameras, the Graflex and the cinema camera and my
flashlight. I knew we were on the same side of the stream and above the
camp and I hoped the Roman could make a short cut and get back before
the sun set.

They went off and now, at the end of the day, the sun came out brightly
below the clouds and the Wanderobo-Masai and I looked at this kudu,
measured his horns, smelled the fine smell of him, sweeter than an eland
even, stroked his nose, his neck, and his shoulder, marvelling at his
great ears, and the smoothness and cleanness of his hide, looked at his
hooves, that were built long, narrow, and springy, so he seemed to walk
on tip-toe, felt under his shoulder for the bullet-hole and then shook
hands again while the Wanderobo-Masai told what a man he was and I told
him he was my pal and gave him my best four-bladed pocket knife.

'Let's go look at the first one, Wanderobo-Masai,' I said in English.

The Wanderobo-Masai nodded, understanding perfectly, and we trailed back
to where the big one lay in the edge of the little clearing. We circled
him, looking at him and then the Wanderobo-Masai, reaching underneath
while I held the shoulder up, found the bullet hole and put his finger
in. Then he touched his forehead with the bloody finger and made the
speech about 'Wanderobo-Masai wonderful guide!'

'Wanderobo-Masai king of guides,' I said. 'Wanderobo-Masai my pal.'

I was wet through with sweat and I put on my raincoat that M'Cola had
been carrying and left behind and turned the collar up around my neck. I
was watching the sun now and worrying about it being gone before they
got up with the cameras. In a little while we could hear them coming in
the brush and I shouted to let them know where we were. M'Cola answered
and we shouted back and forth and I could hear them talking and
crashing in the brush while I would shout and watch the sun which was
almost down. Finally I saw them and I shouted to M'Cola, 'Run, run', and
pointed to the sun, but there was no run left in them. They had made a
fast trip uphill, through heavy brush, and when I got the camera, opened
the lens wide and focused on the bull the sun was only lighting the tops
of the trees. I took half a dozen exposures and used the cinema while
they all dragged the kudu to where there seemed to be a little more
light, then the sun was down and, obligation to try to get a picture
over, I put the camera into its case and settled, happily, with the
darkness into the unresponsibility of victory; only emerging to direct
M'Cola in where to cut to make a full enough cape when skinning out the
head-skin. M'Cola used a knife beautifully and I liked to watch him
skin-out, but to-night, after I had shown him where to make the first
cut, well down on the legs, around the lower chest where it joined the
belly and well back over the withers, I did not watch him because I
wanted to remember the bull as I had first seen him, so I went, in the
dusk, to the second kudu and waited there until they came with the
flashlight and then, remembering that I had skinned-out or seen
skinned-out every animal that I had ever shot, yet remembered every one
exactly as he was at every moment, that one memory does not destroy
another, and that the not-watching idea was only laziness and a form of
putting the dishes in the sink until morning, I held the flashlight for
M'Cola while he worked on the second bull and, although tired, enjoyed
as always his fast, clean, delicate scalpeling with the knife, until,
the cape all clear and spread back he nocked through the connection of
the skull and the spine and then, twisting with the horns, swung the
head loose and lifted it, cape and all, free from the neck, the cape
hanging heavy and wet in the light of the electric torch that shone on
his red hands and on the dirty khaki of his tunic. We left the
Wanderobo-Masai, Garrick, the Roman, and his brother with a lantern to
skin out and pack in the meat and M'Cola with a head, the old man with a
head, and me with the flashlight and the two guns, we started in the
dark back for camp.

In the dark the old man fell flat and M'Cola laughed; then the cape
unrolled and came down over his face and he almost choked and we both
laughed. The old man laughed too. Then M'Cola fell in the dark and the
old man and I laughed. A little farther on I went through the covering
on some sort of game pit and went flat on my face and got up to hear
M'Cola chuckling and choking and the old man giggling.

'What the hell is this? A Chaplin comedy?' I asked them in English. They
were both laughing under the heads. We got to the thorn-bush fence,
finally, after a nightmare march through the brush and saw the fire at
the camp and M'Cola seemed to be delighted when the old man fell going
through the thorns and got up cursing and seeming barely able to lift
the head as I shone the flash ahead of him to show him the opening.

We came up to the fire and I could see the old man's face bleeding as
he put the head down against the stick and mud cabin. M'Cola put his
head down, pointed at the old man's face and laughed and shook his head.
I looked at the old man. He was completely done-in, his face was badly
scratched, covered with mud and bleeding, and he was chuckling happily.

'B'wana fell down,' M'Cola said and imitated me pitching forward. They
both chuckled.

I made as though to take a swing at him and said, 'Shenzi!'

He imitated me falling down again and then there was Kamau shaking hands
very gently and respectfully and saying, 'Good, B'wana! Very good,
B'wana!' and then going over to the heads, his eyes shining and
kneeling, stroking the horns and feeling the ears and crooning the same,
sighing, 'Ooo-ooo! Eee-eee!' noises M'Cola had made.

I went into the dark of the tent, we had left the lantern with the meat
bringers, and washed, took off my wet clothes and feeling in the dark in
my rucksack found a pair of pyjamas and a bath-robe. I came out to the
fire wearing these and mosquito boots. I brought my wet things and my
boots to the fire and Kamau spread them on sticks, and put the boots,
each one leg-down, on a stick and back far enough from the blaze where
the fire would not scorch them.

In the firelight I sat on a petrol box with my back against a tree and
Kamau brought the whisky flask and poured some in a cup and I added
water from the canteen and sat drinking and looking in the fire, not
thinking, in complete happiness, feeling the whisky warm me and smooth
me as you straighten the wrinkled sheet in a bed, while Kamau brought
tins from the provisions to see what I would eat for supper. There were
three tins of Christmas special mincemeat, three tins of salmon, and
three of mixed fruit, there were also a number of cakes of chocolate and
a tin of Special Christmas Plum Pudding. I sent these back wondering
what Kati had imagined the mincemeat to be. We had been looking for that
plum pudding for two months.

'Meat?' I asked.

Kamau brought a thick, long chunk of roast Grant gazelle tenderloin from
one of the Grant Pop had shot on the plain while we had been hunting the
twenty-five-mile salt-lick, and some bread.

'Beer?'

He brought one of the big German litre bottles and opened it.

It seemed too complicated sitting on the petrol case and I spread my
raincoat on the ground in front of the fire where the ground had been
dried by the heat and stretched my legs out, leaning my back against the
wooden case. The old man was roasting meat on a stick. It was a choice
piece he had brought with him wrapped in his toga. In a little while
they all began to come in carrying meat and the hides and then I was
stretched out drinking beer and watching the fire and all around they
were talking and roasting meat on sticks. It was getting cold and the
night was clear and there was the smell of the roasting meat, the smell
of the smoke of the fire, the smell of my boots steaming, and, where he
squatted close, the smell of the good old Wanderobo-Masai. But I could
remember the odour of the kudu as he lay in the woods.

Each man had his own meat or collection of pieces of meat on sticks
stuck around the fire, they turned them and tended them, and there was
much talking. Two others that I had not seen had come over from the huts
and the boy we had seen in the afternoon was with them. I was eating a
piece of hot broiled liver I had lifted from one of the sticks of the
Wanderobo-Masai and wondering where the kidneys were. The liver was
delicious. I was wondering whether it was worth while getting up to get
the dictionary to ask about the kidneys when M'Cola said, 'Beer?'

'All right.'

He brought the bottle, opened it, and I lifted it and drank half of it
off to chase down that liver.

'It's a hell of a life,' I told him in English.

He grinned and said, 'More beer?' in Swahili.

My talking English to him was an acceptable joke.

'Watch,' I said, and tipped the bottle up and let it all go down. It was
an old trick we learned in Spain drinking out of wine skins without
swallowing. This impressed the Roman greatly. He came over, squatted
down by the raincoat and started to talk. He talked for a long time.

'Absolutely,' I told him in English. 'And furthermore he can take the
sleigh.'

'More beer?' M'Cola asked.

'You want to see the old man tight, I suppose?'

'N'Dio,' he said. 'Yes,' pretending to understand the English.

'Watch it, Roman.' I started to let the beer go down, saw the Roman
following the motion with his own throat, started to choke, barely
recovered, and lowered the bottle.

'That's all. Can't do it more than twice in an evening. Makes you
liverish.'

The Roman went on talking in his language. I heard him say Simba twice.

'Simba here?'

'No,' he said. 'Over there,' waving at the dark, and I could not make
out the story. But it sounded very good.

'Me plenty Simba,' I said. 'Hell of a man with Simba. Ask M'Cola.' I
could feel that I was getting the evening braggies but Pop and P.O.M.
weren't here to listen. It was not nearly so satisfactory to brag when
you could not be understood, still it was better than nothing. I
definitely had the braggies, on beer, too.

'Amazing,' I told the Roman. He went on with his own story. There was a
little beer in the bottom of the bottle.

'Old Man,' I said. 'Mzee.'

'Yes, B'wana,' said the old man.

'Here's some beer for you. You're old enough, so it can't hurt you.'

I had seen the old man's eyes while he watched me drink and I knew he
was another of the same. He took the bottle, drained it to the last bit
of froth and crouched by his meat sticks holding the bottle lovingly.

'More beer?' asked M'Cola.

'Yes,' I said. 'And my cartridges.'

The Roman had gone on steadily talking. He could tell a longer story
even than Carlos in Cuba.

'That's mighty interesting,' I told him. 'You're a hell of a fellow,
too. We're both good. Listen.' M'Cola had brought the beer and my khaki
coat with the cartridges in the pocket. I drank a little beer, noted the
old man watching and spread out six cartridges. 'I've got the braggies,'
I said. 'You have to stand for this, look!' I touched each of the
cartridges in turn, 'Simba, Simba, Faro, Nyati, Tendalla, Tendalla. What
do you think of that? You don't have to believe it. Look, M'Cola!' and I
named the six cartridges again. 'Lion, lion, rhino, buffalo, kudu,
kudu.'

'Ayee!' said the Roman excitedly.

'N'Dio,' said M'Cola solemnly. 'Yes, it is true.'

'Ayee!' said the Roman and grabbed me by the thumb.

'God's truth,' I said. 'Highly improbable, isn't it?'

'N'Dio,' said M'Cola, counting them over himself. 'Simba, Simba, Faro,
Nyati, Tendalla, Tendalla!'

'You can tell the others,' I said in English. 'That's a hell of a big
piece of bragging. That'll hold me for to-night.'

The Roman went on talking to me again and I listened carefully and ate
another piece of the broiled liver. M'Cola was working on the heads now,
skinning out one skull and showing Kamau how to skin out the easy part
of the other. It was a big job to do for the two of them, working
carefully around the eyes and the muzzle and the cartilage of the ears,
and afterwards flesh all of the head skins so they would not spoil, and
they were working at it very delicately and carefully in the firelight.
I do not remember going to bed, nor if we went to bed.

I remember getting the dictionary and asking M'Cola to ask the boy if he
had a sister and M'Cola saying, 'No, No', to me very firmly and
solemnly.

'Nothing tendacious, you understand. Curiosity.'

M'Cola was firm. 'No,' he said and shook his head. 'Hapana,' in the same
tone he used when we followed the lion into the sanseviera that time.

That disposed of the opportunities for social life and I looked up
kidneys and the Roman's brother produced some from his lot and I put a
piece between two pieces of liver on a stick and started it broiling.

'Make an admirable breakfast,' I said out loud. 'Much better than
mincemeat.'

Then we had a long talk about sable. The Roman did not call them
Tarahalla and that name meant nothing to him. There was some confusion
about buffalo because the Roman kept saying 'nyati', but he meant they
were black like the buff. Then we drew pictures in the dust of ashes
from the fire and what he meant were sable all right. The horns curved
back like scimitars, way back over their withers.

'Bulls?' I said.

'Bulls and cows.'

With the old man and Garrick interpreting, I believed I made out that
there were two herds.

'To-morrow.'

'Yes,' the Roman said. 'To-morrow.'

''Cola,' I said. 'To-day, kudu. To-morrow, sable, buffalo, Simba.'

'Hapana, buffalo!' he said and shook his head. Hapana, Simba!'

'Me and the Wanderobo-Masai buffalo,' I said.

'Yes,' said the Wanderobo-Masai excitedly. 'Yes.'

'There are very big elephants near here,' Garrick said.

'To-morrow, elephants,' I said, teasing M'Cola.

'Hapana elephants!' He knew it was teasing but he did not even want to
hear it said.

'Elephants,' I said. 'Buffalo, Simba, leopard.'

The Wanderobo-Masai was nodding excitedly. 'Rhino,' he put in.

'Hapana!' M'Cola said shaking his head. He was beginning to suffer.

'In those hills many buffalo,' the old man interpreted for the now very
excited Roman who was standing and pointing beyond where the huts were.

'Hapana! Hapana! Hapana!' M'Cola said definitely and finally. 'More
beer?' putting down his knife.

'All right,' I said. 'I'm just kidding you.'

M'Cola was crouched close talking, making an explanation. I heard Pop's
title and I thought it was that Pop would not like it. That Pop would
not want it.

'I was just kidding you,' I said in English. Then in Swahili,
'To-morrow, sable?'

'Yes,' he said feelingly. 'Yes.'

After that the Roman and I had a long talk in which I spoke Spanish and
he spoke whatever it was he spoke and I believe we planned the entire
campaign for the next day.




CHAPTER TWO


I do not remember going to bed nor getting up, only being by the fire in
the grey before daylight, with a tin cup of hot tea in my hand and my
breakfast, on the stick, not looking nearly so admirable and very
over-blown with ashes. The Roman was standing making an oration with
gestures in the direction where the light was beginning to show and I
remember wondering if the bastard had talked all night.

The head skins were all spread and neatly salted and the skulls with the
horns were leaning against the log and stick house. M'Cola was folding
the head skins. Kamau brought me the tins and I told him to open one of
fruit. It was cold from the night and the mixed fruit and the cold
syrupy juice sucked down smoothly. I drank another cup of tea, went in
the tent, dressed, put on my dry boots and we were ready to start. The
Roman had said we would be back before lunch.

We had the Roman's brother as guide. The Roman was going, as near as I
could make out, to spy on one of the herds of sable and we were going to
locate the other. We started out with the brother ahead, wearing a toga
and carrying a spear, then me with the Springfield slung and my small
Zeiss glasses in my pocket, then M'Cola with Pop's glasses, slung on one
side, water canteen on the other, skinning knife, whetstone, extra box
of cartridges, and cakes of chocolates in his pockets, and the big gun
over his shoulder, then the old man with the Graflex, Garrick with the
movie camera, and the Wanderobo-Masai with a spear and bow and arrows.

We said good-bye to the Roman and started out of the thorn-bush fence
just as the sun came through the gap in the hills and shone on the
cornfield, the huts and the blue hills beyond. It promised to be a fine
clear day.

The brother led the way through some heavy brush that soaked us all;
then through the open forest, then steeply uphill until we were well up
on the slope that rose behind the edge of the field where we were
camped. Then we were on a good smooth trail that graded back into these
hills above which the sun had not yet risen. I was enjoying the early
morning, still a little sleepy, going along a little mechanically and
starting to think that we were a very big outfit to hunt quietly,
although everyone seemed to move quietly enough, when we saw two people
coming towards us.

They were a tall, good-looking man with features like the Roman's, but
slightly less noble, wearing a toga and carrying a bow and quiver of
arrows, and behind him, his wife, very pretty, very modest, very wifely,
wearing a garment of brown tanned skins and neck ornament of concentric
copper wire circles and many wire circles on her arms and ankles. We
halted, said 'Jambo', and the brother talked to this seeming tribesman
who had the air of a business man on the way to his office in the city
and, as they spoke in rapid question and answer, I watched the most
freshly brideful wife who stood a little in profile so that I saw her
pretty pear-shaped breasts and the long, clean niggery legs and was
studying her pleasant profile most profitably until her husband spoke to
her suddenly and sharply, then in explanation and quiet command, and she
moved around us, her eyes down, and went on along the trail that we had
come, alone, we all watching her. The husband was going on with us, it
seemed. He had seen the sable that morning and, slightly suspicious,
obviously displeased at leaving that now out-of-sight wife of wives that
we all had taken with our eyes, he led us off and to the right along
another trail, well-worn and smooth, through woods that looked like fall
at home and where you might expect to flush a grouse and have him whirr
off to the other hill or pitch down in the valley.

So, sure enough we put up partridges and, watching them fly, I was
thinking all the country in the world is the same country and all
hunters are the same people. Then we saw a fresh kudu track beside the
trail and then, as we moved through the early morning woods, no
undergrowth now, the first sun coming through the tops of the trees, we
came on the ever miracle of elephant tracks, each one as big around as
the circle you make with your arms putting your hands together, and sunk
a foot deep in the loam of the forest floor, where some bull had passed,
travelling after rain. Looking at the way the tracks graded down through
the pleasant forest I thought that we had the mammoths too, a long time
ago, and when they travelled through the hills in southern Illinois
they made these same tracks. It was just that we were an older country
in America and the biggest game was gone.

We kept along the face of this hill on a pleasant sort of jutting
plateau and then came out to the edge of the hill where there was a
valley and a long open meadow with timber on the far side and a circle
of hills at its upper end where another valley went off to the left. We
stood in the edge of the timber on the face of this hill looking across
the meadow valley which extended to the open out in a steep sort of
grassy basin at the upper end where it was backed by the hills. To our
left there were steep, rounded, wooded hills, with outcroppings of
limestone rock that ran, from where we stood, up to the very head of the
valley, and there formed part of the other range of hills that headed
it. Below us, to the right, the country was rough and broken in hills
and stretches of meadow and then a steep fall of timber that ran to the
blue hills we had seen to the westward beyond the huts where the Roman
and his family lived. I judged camp to be straight down below us and
about five miles to the north-west through the timber.

The husband was standing, talking to the brother and gesturing and
pointing out that he had seen the sable feeding on the opposite side of
the meadow valley and that they must have fed either up or down the
valley. We sat in the shelter of the trees and sent the Wanderobo-Masai
down into the valley to look for tracks. He came back and reported there
were no tracks leading down the valley below us and to the westward, so
we knew they had fed on up the meadow valley.

Now the problem was to so use the terrain that we might locate them, and
get up and into range of them without being seen. The sun was coming
over the hills at the head of the valley and shone on us while
everything at the head of the valley was in heavy shadow. I told the
outfit to stay where they were in the woods, except for M'Cola and the
husband who would go with me, we keeping in the timber and grading up
our side of the valley until we could be above and see into the pocket
of the curve at the upper end to glass it for the sable.

You ask how this was discussed, worked out, and understood with the bar
of language, and I say it was as freely discussed and clearly understood
as though we were a cavalry patrol all speaking the same language. We
were all hunters except, possibly, Garrick, and the whole thing could be
worked out, understood, and agreed to without using anything but a
forefinger to signal and a hand to caution. We left them and worked very
carefully ahead, well back in the timber to get height. Then, when we
were far enough up and along, we crawled out on to a rocky place and,
being behind rock, shielding the glasses with my hat so they would not
reflect the sun, M'Cola nodding and grunting as he saw the
practicability of that, we glassed the opposite side of the meadow
around the edge of the timber, and up into the pocket at the head of the
valley; and there they were. M'Cola saw them just before I did and
pulled my sleeve.

'N'Dio,' I said. Then I held my breath to watch them. All looked very
black, big necked, and heavy. All had the back-curving horns. They were
a long way away. Some were lying down. One was standing. We could see
seven.

'Where's the bull?' I whispered.

M'Cola motioned with his left hand and counted four fingers. It was one
of those lying down in the tall grass and the animal did look much
bigger and the horns much more sweeping. But we were looking into the
morning sun and it was hard to see well. Behind them a sort of gully ran
up into the hill that blocked the end of the valley.

Now we knew what we had to do. We must go back, cross the meadow far
enough down so we were out of sight, get into the timber on the far side
and work along through the timber to get above the sable. First we must
try to make sure there were no more of them in the timber or the meadow
that we must work through before we made our stalk.

I wet my finger and put it up. From the cool side it seemed as though
the breeze came down the valley. M'Cola took some dead leaves and
crumpled them and tossed them up. They fell a little toward us. The wind
was all right and now we must glass the edge of the timber and check on
it.

'Hapana,' M'Cola said finally. I had seen nothing either and my eyes
ached from the pull of the eight-power glasses. We could take a chance
on the timber. We might jump something and spook the sable but we had to
take that chance to get around and above them.

We made our way back and down and told the others. From where they were
we could cross the valley out of sight of its upper end and bending
low, me with my hat off, we headed down into the high meadow grass and
across the deeply cut watercourse that ran down through the centre of
the meadow, across its rocky shelf, and up the grassy bank on the other
side, keeping under the edge of a fold of the valley into the shelter of
the woods. Then we headed up through the woods, crouched, in single
file, to try to get above the sable.

We went forward making as good time as we could and still move quietly.
I had made too many stalks on big horn sheep only to find them fed away
and out of sight when you came round the shoulder of the mountain to
trust these sable to stay where they were and, since once we were in the
timber we could no longer see them, I thought it was important that we
come up above them as fast as we could without getting me too blown and
shaky for the shooting.

M'Cola's water bottle made a noise against the cartridges in his pocket
and I stopped and had him pass it to the Wanderobo-Masai. It seemed too
many people to be hunting with, but they all moved quietly as snakes,
and I was over-confident anyway. I was sure the sable could not see us
in the forest, nor wind us.

Finally I was certain we were above them and that they must be ahead of
us, and past where the sun was shining in a thinning of the forest, and
below us, under the edge of the hill. I checked on the aperture in the
sight being clean, cleaned my glasses and wiped the sweat from my
forehead remembering to put the used handkerchief in my left pocket so I
would not fog my glasses wiping them with it again. M'Cola and I and
the husband started to work our way to the edge of the timber; finally
crawling almost to the edge of the ridge. There were still some trees
between us and the open meadow below and we were behind a small bush and
a fallen tree when, raising our heads, we could see them in the grassy
open, about three hundred yards away, showing big and very dark in the
shadow. Between us was scattered open timber full of sunlight and the
openness of the gulch. As we watched two got to their feet and seemed to
be standing looking at us. The shot was possible but it was too long to
be certain and as I lay, watching, I felt somebody touch me on the arm
and Garrick, who had crawled up, whispered throatily, 'Piga! Piga,
B'wana! Doumi! Doumi!' saying to shoot, that it was a bull. I glanced
back and there were the whole outfit on their bellies or hands and
knees, the Wanderobo-Masai shaking like a bird dog. I was furious and
motioned them all down.

So that was a bull, eh, well there was a much bigger bull that M'Cola
and I had seen lying down. The two sable were watching us and I dropped
my head, I thought they might be getting a flash from my glasses. When I
looked up again, very slowly, I shaded my eyes with my hand. The two
sable had stopped looking and were feeding. But one looked up again
nervously and I saw the dark, heavy-built antelope with scimitar-like
horns swung back staring at us.

I had never seen a sable. I knew nothing about them, neither whether
their eyesight was keen, like a ram who sees you at whatever distance
you see him, or like a bull elk who cannot see you at two hundred yards
unless you move. I was not sure of their size either, but I judged the
range to be all of three hundred yards. I knew I could hit one if I shot
from a sitting position or prone, but I could not say where I would hit
him.

Then Garrick again, 'Piga, B'wana, Piga!' I turned on him as though to
slug him in the mouth. It would have been a great comfort to do it. I
truly was not nervous when I first saw the sable, but Garrick was making
me nervous.

'Far?' I whispered to M'Cola who had crawled up and was lying by me.

'Yes.'

'Shoot?'

'No. Glasses.'

We both watched, using the glasses guardedly. I could only see four.
There had been seven. If that was a bull that Garrick pointed out, then
they were all bulls. They all looked the same colour in the shadow.
Their horns all looked big to me. I knew that with mountain sheep the
rams all kept together in bunches until late in the winter when they
went with the ewes; that in the late summer you found bull elk in
bunches too, before the rutting season, and that later they herded up
together again. We had seen as many as twenty impalla rams together upon
the Serenea. All right, then, they could all be bulls, but I wanted a
good one, the best one, and I tried to remember having read something
about them, but all I could remember was a silly story of some man
seeing the same bull every morning in the same place and never getting
up on him. All I could remember was the wonderful pair of horns we had
seen in the Game Warden's office in Arusha. And here were sable now, and
I must play it right and get the best one. It never occurred to me that
Garrick had never seen a sable and that he knew no more about them than
M'Cola or I.

'Too far,' I said to M'Cola.

'Yes.'

'Come on,' I said, then waved the others down, and we started crawling
up to reach the edge of the hill.

Finally we lay behind a tree and I looked around it. Now we could see
their horns clearly with the glasses and could see the other three. One,
lying down, was certainly much the biggest and the horns, as I caught
them in silhouette, seemed to curve much higher and farther back. I was
studying them, too excited to be happy as I watched them, when I heard
M'Cola whisper 'B'wana.'

I lowered the glasses and looked and there was Garrick, taking no
advantage of the cover, crawling on his hands and knees out to join us.
I put my hand out, palm toward him, and waved him down but he paid no
attention and came crawling on, as conspicuous as a man walking down a
city street on hands and knees. I saw one sable looking toward us,
toward him, rather. Then three more got to their feet. Then the big one
got up and stood broadside with head turned toward us as Garrick came up
whispering, 'Piga, B'wana! Piga! Doumi! Doumi! Kubwa Sana.'

There was no choice now. They were definitely spooked and I lay out
flat on my belly, put my arm through the sling, got my elbows settled
and my right toe pushing the ground and squeezed off on the centre of
the bull's shoulder. But at the roar I knew it was bad. I was over him.
They all jumped and stood looking, not knowing where the noise came
from. I shot again at the bull and threw dirt all over him and they were
off. I was on my feet and hit him as he ran and he was down. Then he was
up and I hit him again and he took it and was in the bunch. They passed
him and I shot and was behind him. Then I hit him again and he was
trailing slowly and I knew I had him. M'Cola was handing me cartridges
and I was shoving shells down into the damned-to-hell, lousy, staggered,
Springfield magazine watching the sable making heavy weather of it
crossing the watercourse. We had him all right. I could see he was very
sick. The others were trailing up into the timber. In the sunlight on
the other side they looked much lighter and the one I'd shot looked
lighter, too. They looked a dark chestnut and the one I had shot was
almost black. But he was not black and I felt there was something wrong.
I shoved the last shell in and Garrick was trying to grab my hand to
congratulate me when, below us across the open space where the gully
that we could not see opened on to the head of the valley, sable started
to pass at a running stampede.

'Good God,' I thought. They all looked like the one I had shot and I was
trying to pick a big one. They all looked about the same and they were
crowding running and then came the bull. Even in the shadow he was a
dead black and shiny as he hit the sun, and his horns swept up high,
then back, huge and dark, in two great curves nearly touching the middle
of his back. He was a bull all right. God, what a bull.

'Doumi,' said M'Cola in my ear. 'Doumi!'

I hit him and at the roar he was down. I saw him up, the others passing,
spreading out, then bunching. I missed him. Then I saw him going almost
straight away up the valley in the tall grass and I hit him again and he
went out of sight. The sable now were going up the hill at the head of
the valley, up the hill at our right, up the hill in the timber across
the valley, spread out and travelling fast. Now that I had seen a bull I
knew they all were cows including the first one I had shot. The bull
never showed and I was absolutely sure that we would find him where I
had seen him go down in the long grass.

The outfit were all up and I shook off handshaking and thumb pulling
before we started down through the trees and over the edge of the gully
and to the meadow on a dead run. My eyes, my mind, and all inside of me
were full of the blackness of that sable bull and the sweep of those
horns and I was thanking God I had the rifle reloaded before he came
out. But it was excited shooting, all of it, and I was not proud of it.
I had gotten excited and shot at the whole animal instead of the right
place and I was ashamed; but the outfit now were drunk excited. I would
have walked but you could not hold them, they were like a pack of dogs
as we ran. As we crossed the meadow opening where we had first seen the
seven and went beyond where the bull had gone out of sight, the grass
suddenly was high and over our heads and every one slowed down. There
were two washed-out concealed ravines ten or twelve feet deep that ran
down to the watercourse and what had looked a smooth grass-filled basin
was very broken, tricky country with grass that was from waist-high to
well above our heads. We found blood at once and it led off to the left,
across the watercourse and up the hillside on the left toward the head
of the valley. I thought that was the first sable but it seemed a wider
swing than he had seemed to make when we watched him going from above in
the timber. I made a circle to look for the big bull but I could not
pick his track from the mass of tracks and in the high grass and the
broken terrain it was difficult to figure just where he had gone.

They were all for the blood spoor and it was like trying to make
badly-trained bird dogs hunt a dead bird when they are crazy to be off
after the rest of the covey.

'Doumi! Doumi!' I said. 'Kubwa Sana! The bull. The big bull.'

'Yes,' everybody agreed. 'Here! Here!' The blood spoor that crossed the
watercourse.

Finally I took that trail thinking we must get them one at a time, and
knowing this one was hard hit and the other would keep. Then, too, I
might be wrong and this might be the big bull, he might possibly have
turned in the high grass and crossed here as we were running down. I had
been wrong before, I remembered.

We trailed fast up the hillside, into the timber, the blood was
splashed freely; made a turn toward the right, climbing steeply, and at
the head of the valley in some large rocks jumped a sable. It went
scrambling and bounding off through the rocks. I saw in an instant that
it was not hit and knew that, in spite of the back-swung dark horns, it
was a cow from the dark chestnut colour. But I saw this just in time to
keep from shooting. I had started to pull when I lowered the rifle.

'Manamouki,' I said. 'It's a cow.'

M'Cola and the two Roman guides agreed. I had very nearly shot. We went
on perhaps five yards and another sable jumped. But this one was swaying
its head wildly and could not clear the rocks. It was hard hit and I
took my time, shot carefully, and broke its neck.

We came up to it, lying in the rocks, a large, deep chestnut-brown
animal, almost black, the horns black and curving handsomely back, there
was a white patch on the muzzle and back from the eye, there was a white
belly; but it was no bull.

M'Cola, still in doubt, verified this and feeling the short, rudimentary
teats said 'Manamouki', and shook his head sadly.

It was the first big bull that Garrick had pointed out.

'Bull down there,' I pointed.

'Yes,' said M'Cola.

I thought that we would give him time to get sick, if he were only
wounded, and then go down and find him. So I had M'Cola make the cuts
for taking off the head skin and we would leave the old man to skin out
the head while we went down after the bull.

I drank some water from the canteen. I was thirsty after the run and the
climb, and the sun was up now and it was getting hot. Then we went down
the opposite side of the valley from that we had just come up trailing
the wounded cow, and below, in the tall grass, casting in circles,
commenced to hunt for the trail of the bull. We could not find it.

The sable had been running in a bunch as they came out and any
individual track was confused or obliterated. We found some blood on the
grass stems where I had first hit him, then lost it, then found it again
where the other blood spoor turned off. Then the tracks had all split up
as they had gone, fan-wise, up the valley and the hills and we could not
find it again. Finally I found blood on a grass blade about fifty yards
up the valley and I plucked it and held it up. This was a mistake. I
should have brought them to it. Already everyone but M'Cola was losing
faith in the bull.

He was not there. He had disappeared. He had vanished. Perhaps he had
never existed. Who could say he was a real bull? If I had not plucked
the grass with the blood on it I might have held them. Growing there
with blood on it, it was evidence. Plucked, it meant nothing except to
me and to M'Cola. But I could find no more blood and they were all
hunting half-heartedly now. The only possible way was to quarter every
foot of the high grass and trace every foot of the gullies. It was very
hot now and they were only making a pretence of hunting.

Garrick came up. 'All cows,' he said. 'No bull. Just biggest cow. You
killed biggest cow. We found her. Smaller cow get away.'

'You wind-blown son of a bitch,' I said, then, using my fingers.
'Listen. Seven cows. Then fifteen cows and one bull. Bull hit. Here.'

'All cows,' said Garrick.

'One big cow hit. One bull hit.'

I was so sure sounding that they agreed to this and searched for a while
but I could see they were losing belief in the bull.

'If I had one good dog,' I thought. 'Just one good dog.'

Then Garrick came up. 'All cows,' he said. 'Very big cows.'

'You're a cow,' I said. 'Very big cow.'

This got a laugh from the Wanderobo-Masai, who was getting to look a
picture of sick misery. The brother half believed in the bull, I could
see. Husband, by now, did not believe in any of us. I didn't think he
even believed in the kudu of the night before. Well, after this
shooting, I did not blame him.

M'Cola came up. 'Hapana,' he said glumly. Then, 'B'wana, you shot that
bull?'

'Yes,' I said. For a minute I began to doubt whether there ever was a
bull. Then I saw again his heavy, high-withered blackness and the high
rise of his horns before they swept back, him running with the bunch,
shoulder higher than them and black as hell and as I saw it, M'Cola saw
it again too through the rising mist of the savage's unbelief in what he
can no longer see.

'Yes,' M'Cola agreed. 'I see him. You shoot him.'

I told it again. 'Seven cows. Shoot biggest. Fifteen cows, one bull. Hit
that bull.'

They all believed it now for a moment and circled, searching, but the
faith died at once in the heat of the sun and the tall grass blowing.

'All cows,' Garrick said. The Wanderobo-Masai nodded, his mouth open. I
could feel the comfortable lack of faith coming over me too. It was a
damned sight easier not to hunt in that sun in that shadeless pocket and
in the sun on that steep hillside. I told M'Cola we would hunt up the
valley on both sides, finish skinning out the head, and he and I would
come down alone and find the bull. You could not hunt them against that
unbelief. I had had no chance to train them; no power to discipline. If
there had been no law I would have shot Garrick and they would all have
hunted or cleared out. I think they would have hunted. Garrick was not
popular. He was simply poison.

M'Cola and I came back down the valley, quartered it like bird dogs,
circled and followed and checked track after track. I was hot and very
thirsty. The sun was something serious by now.

'Hapana,' M'Cola said. We could not find him. Whatever he was, we had
lost him.

'Maybe he was a cow. Maybe it was all goofy,' I thought, letting the
unbelief come in as a comfort. We were going to hunt up the hill side to
the right and then we would have checked it all and would take the cow
head into camp and see what the Roman had located. I was dead thirsty
and drained the canteen. We would get water in camp.

We started up the hill and I jumped a sable in some brush. I almost
loosed off at it before I saw it was a cow. That showed how one could be
hidden, I thought. We would have to get the men and go over it all
again; and then, from the old man, came a wild shouting.

'Doumi! Doumi!' in a high, screaming shout.

'Where?' I shouted, running across the hill toward him.

'There! There!' he shouted, pointing into the timber on the other side
of the head of the valley. 'There! There! There he goes! There!'

We came on a dead run but the bull was out of sight in the timber on the
hillside. The old man said he was huge, he was black, he had great
horns, and he came by him ten yards away, hit in two places, in the gut
and high up in the rump, hard hit but going fast, crossing the valley,
through the boulders and going up the hillside.

I gut-shot him, I thought. Then as he was going away I laid that one on
his stern. He lay down and was sick and we missed him. Then, when we
were past, he jumped.

'Come on,' I said. Everyone was excited and ready to go now and the old
man was chattering about the bull as he folded the head skin and put the
head upon his own head and we started across through the rocks and up,
quartering up on to the hillside. There, where the old man had pointed,
was a very big sable track, the hoof marks spread wide, the tracks
grading up into the timber and there was blood, plenty of it.

We trailed him fast, hoping to jump him and have a shot, and it was easy
trailing in the shade of the trees with plenty of blood to follow. But
he kept climbing, grading up around the hill, and he was travelling
fast. We kept the blood bright and wet but we could not come up on him.
I did not track but kept watching ahead thinking I might see him as he
looked back, or see him down, or cutting down across the hill through
the timber, and M'Cola and Garrick were tracking, aided by every one but
the old man who staggered along with the sable skull and head skin held
on his own grey head. M'Cola had hung the empty water bottle on him, and
Garrick had loaded him with the cinema camera. It was hard going for the
old man.

Once we came on a place where the bull had rested and watched his back
track, there was a little pool of blood on a rock where he had stood,
behind some bushes, and I cursed the wind that blew our scent on ahead
of us. There was a big breeze blowing now and I was certain we had no
chance of surprising him, our scent would keep everything moving out of
the way ahead of us as long as anything could move. I thought of trying
to circle ahead with M'Cola and let them track but we were moving fast,
the blood was still bright on the stones and on the fallen leaves and
grass and the hills were too steep for us to make a circle. I did not
see how we could lose him.

Then he took us up and into a rocky, ravine-cut country where the
trailing was slow and the climbing difficult. Here, I thought, we would
jump him in a gully but the spatters of blood, not so bright now, went
on around the boulders, over the rocks and up and up and left us on a
rim-rock ledge. He must have gone down from there. It was too steep
above for him to have gone over the top of the hill. There was no other
way to go but down, but how had he gone, and down which ravine? I sent
them looking down three possible ways and got out on the rim to try to
sight him. They could not find any spoor, and then the Wanderobo-Masai
called from below and to the right that he had blood and, climbing down,
we saw it on a rock and then followed it in occasional drying splatters
down through a steep descent to the meadow below. I was encouraged when
he started down hill and in the knee-high, heavy grass of the meadow
trailing was easy again, because the grass brushed against his belly and
while you could not see tracks clearly without stooping double and
parting the grass to look, yet the blood spoor was plain on the grass
blades. But it was dry now and dully shiny and I knew we had lost much
time on him when he rim-rocked us on the hill.

Finally his trail crossed the dry watercourse about where we had first
come in sight of the meadow in the morning and led away into the
sloping, sparsely-wooded country on the far side. There were no clouds
and I could feel the sun now, not just as heat but as a heavy deadly
weight on my head and I was very thirsty. It was very hot but it was not
the heat that bothered. It was the weight of the sun.

Garrick had given up tracking seriously and was only contributing
theatrical successes of discovering blood when M'Cola and I were
checked. He would do no routine tracking any more, but would rest and
then track in irritating spurts. The Wanderobo-Masai was useless as a
blue-jay and I had M'Cola give him the big rifle to carry so that we
would get some use out of him. The Roman's brother was obviously not a
hunter and the husband was not very interested. He did not seem to be a
hunter either. As we trailed, slowly, the ground, hard now as the sun
had baked it, the blood only black spots and splatters on the short
grass, one by one the brother, Garrick, and the Wanderobo-Masai dropped
out and sat in the shade of the scattered trees.

The sun was terrific and as it was necessary to track with heads bent
down and stooping, in spite of a handkerchief spread over my neck I had
a pounding ache in my head.

M'Cola was tracking slowly, steadily, and absolutely absorbed in the
problem. His bare, bald head gleamed with sweat and when it ran down in
his eyes he would pluck a grass stem, hold it with each hand and shave
the sweat off his forehead and bald black crown with the stem.

We went on slowly. I had always sworn to Pop that I could out-track
M'Cola but I realized now that in the past I had been giving a sort of
Garrick performance in picking up the spoor when it was lost and that in
straight, steady trailing, now in the heat, with the sun really bad,
truly bad so that you could feel what it was doing to your head, cooking
it to hell, trailing in short grass on hard ground where a blood spot
was a dry, black blister on a grass blade, difficult to see; that you
must find the next little black spot perhaps twenty yards away, one
holding the last blood while the other found the next, then going on,
one on each side of the trail; pointing with a grass stem at the spots
to save talking, until it ran out again and you marked the last blood
with your eye and both made casts to pick it up again, signalling with a
hand up, my mouth too dry to talk, a heat shimmer over the ground now
when you straightened up to let your neck stop aching and looked ahead,
I knew M'Cola was immeasurably the better man and the better tracker.
Have to tell Pop, I thought.

At this point M'Cola made a joke. My mouth was so dry that it was hard
to talk.

'B'wana,' M'Cola said, looking at me when I had straightened up and was
leaning my neck back to get the crick out of it.

'Yes?'

'Whisky?' and he offered me the flask.

'You bastard,' I said in English, and he chuckled and shook his head.

'Hapana whisky?'

'You savage,' I said in Swahili.

We started tracking again, M'Cola shaking his head and very amused, and
in a little while the grass was longer and it was easier again. We
crossed all that semi-open country we had seen from the hillside in the
morning and going down a slope the tracks swung back into high grass. In
this higher grass I found that by half shutting my eyes I could see his
trail where he had shouldered through the grass and I went ahead fast
without trailing by the blood, to M'Cola's amazement, but then we came
out on very short grass and rock again and now the trailing was the
hardest yet.

He was not bleeding much now; the sun and the heat must have dried the
wounds and we found only an occasional small starry splatter on the
rocky ground.

Garrick came up and made a couple of brilliant discoveries of blood
spots, then sat down under a tree. Under another tree I could see the
poor old Wanderobo-Masai holding his first and last job as gun-bearer.
Under another was the old man, the sable head beside him like some
black-mass symbol, his equipment hanging from his shoulders. M'Cola and
I went on trailing very slowly and laboriously across the long stony
slope and back and up into another tree-scattered meadow, and through
it, and into a long field with piled up boulders at the end. In the
middle of this field we lost the trail completely and circled and hunted
for nearly two hours before we found blood again.

The old man found it for us below the boulders and to the right half a
mile away. He had gone ahead down there on his own idea of what the bull
would have done. The old man was a hunter.

Then we trailed him very slowly, on to hard stony ground a mile away.
But we could not trail from there. The ground was too hard to leave a
track and we never found blood again. Then we hunted on our various
theories of where the bull would go, but the country was too big and we
had no luck.

'No good,' M'Cola said.

I straightened up and went over to the shade of a big tree. It felt cool
as water and the breeze cooled my skin through the wet shirt. I was
thinking about the bull and wishing to God I had never hit him. Now I
had wounded him and lost him. I believe he kept right on travelling and
went out of that country. He never showed any tendency to circle back.
To-night he would die and the hyenas would eat him, or, worse, they
would get him before he died, hamstringing him and pulling his guts out
while he was alive. The first one that hit that blood spoor would stay
with it until he found him. Then he would call up the others. I felt a
son of a bitch to have hit him and not killed him. I did not mind
killing anything, any animal, if I killed it cleanly, they all had to
die and my interference with the nightly and the seasonal killing that
went on all the time was very minute and I had no guilty feeling at all.
We ate the meat and kept the hides and horns. But I felt rotten sick
over this sable bull. Besides, I wanted him, I wanted him damned badly,
I wanted him more than I would admit. Well, we had played our string out
with him. Our chance was at the start when he was down and we missed
him. We had lost that. No, our best chance, the only chance a rifleman
should ever ask, was when I had a shot and shot at the whole animal
instead of calling the shot. It was my own lousy fault. I was a son of a
bitch to have gut-shot him. It came from over-confidence in being able
to do a thing and then omitting one of the steps in how it is done.
Well, we had lost him. I doubted if there was a dog in the world could
trail him now in that heat. Still that was the only chance. I got out
the dictionary and asked the old man if there were any dogs at the
Roman's place.

'No,' said the old man. 'Hapana.'

We made a very wide circle and I sent the brother and the husband out in
another circle. We found nothing, no trace, no tracks, no blood, and I
told M'Cola we would start for camp. The Roman's brother and the husband
went up the valley to get the meat of the sable cow we had shot. We were
beaten.

M'Cola and I ahead, the other following, we went across the long heat
haze of the open country, down to cross the dry watercourse, and up and
into the grateful shade of the trail through the woods. As we were going
along through the broken sunlight and shadow, the floor of the forest
smooth and springy where we cut across to save distance from the trail,
we saw, less than a hundred yards away, a herd of sable standing in the
timber looking at us. I pulled back the bolt and looked for the best
pair of horns.

'Doumi,' Garrick whispered. 'Doumi kubwa sana!'

I looked where he pointed. It was a very big cow sable, dark chestnut,
white marks on the face, white belly, heavy built and with a fine
curving pair of horns. She was standing broadside to us with her head
turned, looking. I looked carefully at the whole lot. They were all
cows; evidently the bunch whose bull I had wounded and lost, and they
had come over the hill and herded up again together here.

'We go to camp,' I said to M'Cola.

As we started forward the sable jumped and ran past us, crossing the
trail ahead. At every good pair of cow horns, Garrick said, 'Bull,
B'wana. Big, big bull. Shoot, B'wana. Shoot, oh shoot!'

'All cows,' I said to M'Cola when they were past, running in a panic
through the sun-splashed timber.

'Yes,' he agreed.

'Old man,' I said. The old man came up.

'Let the guide carry that,' I said.

The old man lowered the cow sable head.

'No,' said Garrick.

'Yes,' I said. 'Bloody well yes.'

We went on through the woods toward camp. I was feeling better, much
better. All through the day I had never thought once of the kudu. Now we
were coming home to where they were waiting.

It seemed much longer coming home although, usually, the return over a
new trail is shorter. I was tired all the way into my bones, my head
felt cooked, and I was thirstier than I had ever been in my life. But
suddenly, walking through the woods, it was much cooler. A cloud had
come over the sun.

We came out of the timber and down on to the flat and in sight of the
thorn fence. The sun was behind a bank of clouds now and then in a
little while the sky was covered completely and the clouds looked heavy
and threatening. I thought perhaps this had been the last clear hot day;
unusual heat before the rains. First I thought: if it had only rained,
so that the ground would hold a track, we could have stayed with that
bull for ever; then, looking at the heavy, woolly clouds that so
quickly had covered all the sky, I thought that if we were going to join
the outfit, and get the car across that ten-mile stretch of black cotton
road on the way to Handeni, we had better start. I pointed to the sky.

'Bad,' M'Cola agreed.

'Go to the camp of B'wana M'Kubwa?'

'Better.' Then, vigorously, accepting the decision, 'N'Dio. N'Dio.'

'We go,' I said.

Arrived at the thorn fence and the hut, we broke camp fast. There was a
runner there from our last camp who had brought a note, written before
P.O.M. and Pop had left, and bringing my mosquito net. There was nothing
in the note, only good luck and that they were starting. I drank some
water from one of our canvas bags, sat on a petrol tin and looked at the
sky. I could not, conscientiously, chance staying. If it rained here we
might not even be able to get out to the road. If it rained heavily on
the road, we would never get out to the coast that season. Both the
Austrian and Pop had said that, I had to go.

That was settled, so there was no use to think how much I wanted to
stay. The day's fatigue helped make the decision easy. Everything was
being loaded into the car and they were all gathering up their meat from
the sticks around the ashes of the fire.

'Don't you want to eat, B'wana?' Kamau asked me.

'No,' I said. Then in English, 'Too bloody tired.'

'Eat. You are hungry.'

'Later, in the car.'

M'Cola went by with a load, his big, flat face completely blank again.
It only came alive about hunting or some joke. I found a tin cup by the
fire and called to him to bring the whisky, and the blank face cracked
at the eyes and mouth into a smile as he took the flask out of his
pocket.

'With water better,' he said.

'You black Chinaman.'

They were all working fast and the Roman's women came over and stood a
little way away watching the carrying and the packing of the car. There
were two of them, good-looking, well built, and shy, but interested. The
Roman was not back yet. I felt very badly to go off like this with no
explanation to him. I liked the Roman very much and had a high regard
for him.

I took a drink of the whisky and water and looked at the two pairs of
kudu horns that leaned against the wall of the chicken coop hut. From
the white, cleanly picked skulls the horns rose in slow spirals that
spreading made a turn, another turn, and then curved delicately into
those smooth, ivory-like points. One pair was narrower and taller
against the side of the hut. The other was almost as tall but wider in
spread and heavier in beam. They were the colour of black walnut meats
and they were beautiful to see. I went over and stood the Springfield
against the hut between them and the tips reached past the muzzle of the
rifle. As Kamau came back from carrying a load to the car I told him to
bring the camera and then had him stand beside them while I took a
picture. Then he picked them up, each head a load, and carried them over
to the car.

Garrick was talking loudly and in a roostery way to the Roman's women.
As near as I could make out he was offering them the empty petrol boxes
in exchange for a piece of something.

'Come here,' I called to him. He came over still feeling smart.

'Listen,' I told him in English. 'If I get through this safari without
socking you it's going to be a bloody marvel. And if I ever hit you I'll
break your mucking jaw. That's all.'

He did not understand the words but the tone made it clearer than if I
had got something out of the dictionary to tell him. I stood up and
motioned to the women that they could have the petrol tins and the
cases. I was damned if I could not have anything to do with them if I
would let Garrick make any passes.

'Get in the car,' I told him. 'No,' as he started to make delivery of
one of the petrol tins, 'in the car.' He went over to the car.

We were all packed now and ready to go. The horns were curling out the
back of the car, tied on to the loads. I left some money for the Roman
and one of the kudu hides with the boy. Then we got in the car. I got in
the front seat with the Wanderobo-Masai. Behind were M'Cola, Garrick,
and the runner, who was a man from the old man's village by the road.
The old man was crouched on top of the loads at the back, close under
the roof.

We waved and started, passing more of the Roman's household, the older
and uglier part, roasting up piles of meat by a log fire beside the
trail that came up from the river through the maize field. We made the
crossing all right, the creek was down and the banks had dried and I
looked back at the field, the Roman's huts, and the stockade where we
had camped, and the blue hills, dark under the heavy sky, and I felt
very badly not to have seen the Roman and explain why we had gone off
like this.

Then we were going through the woods, following our trail and trying to
make time to get out before dark. We had trouble, twice, at boggy places
and Garrick seemed to be in a state of great hysteria, ordering people
about when we were cutting brush and shovelling, until I was certain I
would have to hit him. He called for corporal punishment the way a
showing-off child does for a spanking. Kamau and M'Cola were both
laughing at him. He was playing the victorious leader home from the
chase now. I thought it was really a shame that he could not have his
ostrich plumes.

Once when we were stuck and I was shovelling and he was stooping over in
a frenzy of advice and command-giving, I brought the handle of the
shovel, with manifest un-intention, up hard into his belly and he sat
down, backwards. I never looked toward him, and M'Cola, Kamau, and I
could not look at each other for fear we would laugh.

'I am hurt,' he said in astonishment, getting to his feet.

'Never get near a man shovelling,' I said in English. 'Damned
dangerous.'

'I am hurt,' said Garrick holding his belly.

'Rub it,' I told him and rubbed mine to show him how. We all got into
the car again and I began to feel sorry for the poor, bloody, useless,
theatrical bastard, so I told M'Cola I would drink a bottle of beer. He
got one out from under the loads in the back, we were going through the
deer-park-looking country now, opened it, and I drank it slowly. I
looked around and saw Garrick was all right now, letting his mouth run
freely again. He rubbed his belly and seemed to be telling them what a
hell of a man he was and how he had never felt it. I could feel the old
man watching me from up under the roof as I drank the beer.

'Old man,' I said.

'Yes, B'wana.'

'A present,' and I handed what was left in the bottle back. There wasn't
much left but the foam and a very little beer.

'Beer?' asked M'Cola.

'By God, yes,' I said. I was thinking about beer and in my mind was back
to that year in the spring when we walked on the mountain road to the
Bains de Alliez and the beer-drinking contest where we failed to win the
calf and came home that night around the mountain with the moonlight on
the fields of narcissi that grew on the meadows, and how we were drunk
and talked about how you would describe that light on that paleness, and
the brown beer sitting at the wood tables under the wistaria vine at
Aigle when we came in across the Rhone Valley from fishing the
Stockalper with the horse chestnut trees in bloom, and Chink and I again
discussing writing and whether you could call them waxen candelabras.
God, what bloody literary discussions we had; we were literary as hell
then just after the war, and later there was the good beer at Lipp's at
midnight after Mascart-Ledoux at the Cirque de Paris or Routis-Ledoux,
or after any other great fight where you lost your voice and were still
too excited to turn in; but beer was mostly those years just after the
war with Chink and in the mountains. Flags for the Fusilier, crags for
the Mountaineer, for English poets beer, strong beer for me. That was
Chink then, quoting Robert Graves, then. We outgrew some countries and
we went to others but beer was still a bloody marvel. The old man knew
it too. I had seen it in his eye the first time he saw me take a drink.

'Beer,' said M'Cola. He had it open, and I looked out at that park-like
country, the engine hot under my boots, the Wanderobo-Masai as strong as
ever beside me, Kamau watching the grooves of the tyre tracks in the
green turf, and I hung my booted legs over the side to let my feet cool
and drank the beer and wished old Chink was along. Captain Eric Edward
Dorman-Smith, M.C., of His Majesty's Fifth Fusiliers. Now if he were
here we could discuss how to describe this deer-park country and whether
deer-park was enough to call it. Pop and Chink were much alike. Pop was
older and more tolerant for his years and the same sort of company. I
was learning under Pop, while Chink and I had discovered a big part of
the world together and then our ways had gone a long way apart.

But that damned sable bull. I should have killed him; but it was a
running shot. To hit him at all I had to use him all as a target. Yes,
you bastard, but what about the cow you missed twice, prone, standing
broadside? Was that a running shot? No. If I'd gone to bed last night I
would not have done that. Or if I'd wiped out the bore to get the oil
out she would not have thrown high the first time. Then I would not have
pulled down and shot under her the second shot. Every damned thing is
your own fault if you're any good. I thought I could shoot a shot-gun
better than I could and I had lost plenty of money backing my opinion,
but I knew, coldly, and outside myself, that I could shoot a rifle on
game as well as any son of a bitch that ever lived. Like hell I could.
So what? So I gut-shot a sable bull and let him get away. Could I shoot
as well as I thought I could? Sure. Then why did I miss on that cow?
Hell, everybody is off sometime. You've got no bloody business to be
off. Who the hell are you? My conscience? Listen, I'm all right with my
conscience. I know just what kind of a son of a bitch I am and I know
what I can do well. If I hadn't had to leave and pull out I would have
got a sable bull. You know the Roman was a hunter. There was another
herd. Why did I have to make a one-night stand? Was that any way to
hunt? Hell, no. I'd make some money some way and when we came back we
would come to the old man's village in lorries, then pack in with
porters so there wouldn't be any damned car to worry about, send the
porters back, and make a camp in the timber up the stream above the
Roman's and hunt that country slowly, living there and hunting out each
day, sometimes laying off and writing for a week, or writing half the
day, or every other day, and get to know it as I knew the country around
the lake where we were brought up. I'd see the buffalo feeding where
they lived, and when the elephants came through the hills we would see
them and watch them breaking branches and not have to shoot, and I would
lie in the fallen leaves and watch the kudu feed out and never fire a
shot unless I saw a better head than this one in the back, and instead
of trailing that sable bull, gut-shot to hell, all day, I'd lie behind a
rock and watch them on the hillside and see them long enough so they
belonged to me for ever. Sure, if Garrick didn't take his B'wana Simba
car in there and shoot the country out. But if he did I'd go on down
beyond those hills and there would be another country where a man could
live and hunt if he had time to live and hunt. They'd gone in wherever a
car could go. But there must be pockets like this all over, that no one
knows of, that the cars pass all along the road. They all hunt the same
places.

'Beer?' asked M'Cola.

'Yes,' I said.

Sure, you couldn't make a living. Everyone had explained that. The
locusts came and ate your crops and the monsoon failed, and the rains
did not come, and everything dried up and died. There were ticks and fly
to kill the stock, and the mosquitoes gave you fever and maybe you got
blackwater. Your cattle would die and you would get no price for your
coffee. It took an Indian to make money from sisal and on the coast
every coconut plantation meant a man ruined by the idea of making money
from copra. A white hunter worked three months out of the year and drank
for twelve and the Government was ruining the country for the benefit of
the Hindu and the natives. That was what they told you. Sure. But I did
not want to make money. All I wanted was to live in it and have time to
hunt. Already I had had one of the diseases and had experienced the
necessity of washing a three-inch bit of my large intestine with soap
and water and tucking it back where it belonged an unnumbered amount of
times a day. There were remedies which cured this and it was well worth
going through for what I had seen and where I had been. Besides I caught
that on the dirty boat out from Marseilles. P.O.M. hadn't been ill a
day. Neither had Karl. I loved this country and I felt at home and where
a man feels at home, outside of where he's born, is where he's meant to
go. Then, in my grandfather's time, Michigan was a malaria ridden state.
They called it fever and ague. And in Tortugas, where I'd spent months,
a thousand men once died of yellow fever. New continents and islands try
to frighten you with disease as a snake hisses. The snake may be
poisonous too. You kill them off. Hell, what I had a month ago would
have killed me in the old days before they invented the remedies. Maybe
it would and maybe I would have got well.

It is easier to keep well in a good country by taking simple
precautions than to pretend that a country which is finished is still
good.

A continent ages quickly once we come. The natives live in harmony with
it. But the foreigner destroys, cuts down the trees, drains the water,
so that the water supply is altered, and in a short time the soil, once
the sod is turned under, is cropped out, and next it starts to blow away
as it has blown away in every old country and as I had seen it start to
blow in Canada. The earth gets tired of being exploited. A country wears
out quickly unless man puts back in it all his residue and that of all
his beasts. When he quits using beasts and uses machines the earth
defeats him quickly. The machine can't reproduce, nor does it fertilize
the soil, and it eats what he cannot raise. A country was made to be as
we found it. We are the intruders and after we are dead we may have
ruined it but it will still be there and we don't know what the next
changes are. I suppose they all end up like Mongolia.

I would come back to Africa but not to make a living from it. I could do
that with two pencils and a few hundred sheets of the cheapest paper.
But I would come back to where it pleased me to live; to really live.
Not just to let my life pass. Our people went to America because that
was the place to go then. It had been a good country and we had made a
mess of it and I would go, now, somewhere else as we had always had the
right to go somewhere else and as we had always gone. You could always
come back. Let the others come to America who did not know that they had
come too late. Our people had seen it at its best and fought for it
when it was well worth fighting for. Now I would go somewhere else. We
always went in the old days and there were still good places to go.

I knew a good country when I saw one. Here there was game, plenty of
birds, and I liked the natives. Here I could shoot and fish. That, and
writing, and reading, and seeing pictures was all I cared about doing.
And I could remember all the pictures. Other things I liked to watch but
they were what I liked to do. That and ski-ing. But my legs were bad now
and it was not worth the time you spent hunting good snow any more. You
saw too many people ski-ing now.

Now, the car making a turn around a bank and crossing a green, grassy
field, we came in sight of the Masai village.

When the Masai saw us they started running and we stopped, surrounded by
them, just below the stockade. There were the young warriors who had run
with us, and now their women and the children all came out to see us.
The children were all quite young and the men and women all seemed the
same age. There were no old people. They all seemed to be our great
friends and we gave a very successful party with refreshments in the
shape of our bread which they all ate with much laughing, the men first,
then the women. Then I had M'Cola open the two cans of mincemeat and the
plum pudding and I cut these into rations and passed them out. I had
heard and read that the Masai subsisted only on the blood of their
cattle mixed with milk, drawing the blood off from a wound in a vein of
the neck made by shooting an arrow at close range. These Masai, however,
ate bread, cold mincemeat, and plum pudding with great relish and much
laughter and joking. One very tall and handsome one kept asking me
something that I did not understand and then five or six more joined in.
Whatever this was they wanted it very badly. Finally the tallest one
made a very strange face and emitted a sound like a dying pig. I
understood finally: he was asking if we had one of those, and I pressed
the button of the klaxon. The children ran screaming, the warriors
laughed and laughed, and then as Kamau, in response to popular demand,
pressed the klaxon again and again, I watched the look of utter rapture
and ecstasy on the women's faces and knew that with that klaxon he could
have had any woman in the tribe.

Finally we had to go and after distributing the empty beer bottles, the
labels from the bottles, and finally the bottle caps, picked up by
M'Cola from the floor, we left, klaxoning the women into ecstasy, the
children into panic, and the warriors into delight. The warriors ran
with us for a good way but we had to make time, the going was good
through the park-like country and, in a little while, we waved to the
last of them standing straight and tall, in their brown skin garments,
their clubbed pig-tails hanging, their faces stained a red-brown,
leaning on their spears, looking after us and smiling.

The sun was almost down and as I did not know the road I had the runner
get up in front to sit with the Wanderobo-Masai and help direct Kamau
and I sat in the back with M'Cola and Garrick. We were out of the park
country and on to the dry bush-spattered plain before the sun went down
and I had another bottle of the German beer and, watching the country,
saw, suddenly, that all the trees were full of white storks. I did not
know whether they were there in migration or were following the locusts
but, in the twilight, they were lovely to see and, deeply moved by them,
I gave the old man a good two fingers of beer that was left in the
bottom of the bottle.

On the next bottle I forgot and drank it all before I remembered the old
man. (There were still storks in the trees and we saw some Grant's
gazelles feeding off to the right. A jackal, like a grey fox, trotted
across the road.) So I told M'Cola to open another bottle and we were
through the plain and climbing the long slope toward the road and the
village, the two mountains in sight now, and it almost dark and quite
cold when I handed the bottle to the old man, who took it where he was
crouched up under the roof, and nursed it tenderly.

At the village we stopped in the road in the dark, and I paid the runner
the amount it said to give him in the note he had brought. I paid the
old man the amount Pop said to pay him and a bonus. Then there was a big
dispute among them all. Garrick was to go to the main camp to get his
money. Abdullah insisted upon going along. He did not trust Garrick. The
Wanderobo-Masai insisted pitifully that he go. He was sure the others
would cheat him out of his share and I was fairly sure they would, too.
There was petrol that had been left for us to use in case we were short
and for us to bring in any event. We were overloaded and I did not know
how the road was ahead. But I thought we might carry Abdullah and
Garrick and squeeze in the Wanderobo-Masai. There was no question of the
old man going. He had been paid off and had agreed to the amount, but
now he would not leave the car. He crouched on top of the load and hung
on to the ropes saying, 'I am going with B'wana'.

M'Cola and Kamau had to break his handholds and pull him off to re-load,
him shouting, 'I want to go with B'wana!'

While they were loading in the dark he held on to my arm and talked very
quietly in a language that I could not understand.

'You have the shillings,' I said.

'Yes, B'wana,' he said. That was not what it was about. The money was
all right.

Then, when we started to get in the car he broke away and started to
climb up through the back and on to the loads. Garrick and Abdullah
pulled him down.

'You can't go. There isn't room.'

He talked to me softly again, begging and pleading.

'No, there is no room.'

I remembered I had a small penknife and I got it out of my pocket and
put it in his hand. He pushed it back in my hand.

'No,' he said. 'No.'

He was quiet then and stood by the road. But when we started, he started
to run after the car and I could hear him in the dark screaming,
'B'wana! I want to go with B'wana!'

We went on up the road, the headlights making it seem like a boulevard
after where we had been. We drove fifty-five miles on that road in the
dark night without incident. I stayed awake until after we were through
the bad part, a long plain of deeply rutted black cotton where the
headlights picked out the trail through bushes and then, when the road
was better, I went to sleep, waking occasionally to see the headlights
shining on a wall of tall trees, or a naked bank, or when we ground in
low gear up a steep place, the light slanting up ahead.

Finally, when the speedometer showed fifty miles, we stopped and woke a
native in his hut and M'Cola asked about the camp. I slept again and
then woke as we were turning off the road and on a track through trees
with the fires of the camp showing ahead. Then as we came to where our
lights shone on the green tents I shouted and we all commenced to shout
and blew the klaxon and I let the gun off, the flame cutting up into the
dark and it making a great noise. Then we were stopped and out from
Pop's tent I saw him coming, thick and heavy in his dressing-gown, and
then he had his arms around my shoulders and said, 'You god damned bull
fighter', and I was clapping him on the back.

And I said, 'Look at them, Pop'.

'I saw them,' he said. 'The whole back of the car's full of them.'

Then I was holding P.O.M. tight, she feeling very small inside the
quilted bigness of the dressing-gown, and we were saying things to each
other.

Then Karl came out and I said, 'Hi, Karl'.

'I'm so damned glad,' he said. 'They're marvellous.'

M'Cola had the horns down by now and he and Kamau were holding them so
they could all see them in the light of the fire.

'What did you get?' I asked Karl.

'Just another one of those. What do you call them? Tendalla.'

'Swell,' I said. I knew I had one no one could beat and I hoped he had a
good one too. 'How big was he?'

'Oh, fifty-seven,' Karl said.

'Let's see him,' I said, cold in the pit of my stomach.

'He's over there,' Pop said, and we went over. They were the biggest,
widest, darkest, longest-curling, heaviest, most unbelievable pair of
kudu horns in the world. Suddenly, poisoned with envy, I did not want to
see mine again; never, never.

'That's great,' I said, the words coming out as cheerfully as a croak. I
tried it again. 'That's swell. How did you get him?'

'There were three,' Karl said. 'They were all as big as that. I couldn't
tell which was the biggest. We had a hell of a time. I hit him four or
five times.'

'He's a wonder,' I said. I was getting so I could do it a little better
but it would not fool anybody yet.

'I'm awfully glad you got yours,' Karl said. 'They're beauties. I want
to hear all about them in the morning. I know you're tired to-night.
Good night.'

He went off, delicate as always, so we could talk about it if we wanted
to.

'Come on over and have a drink,' I called.

'No thanks, I think I better go to bed. I've got a sort of headache.'

'Good night, Karl.'

'Good night. Good night, Poor Old Mamma,'

'Good night,' we all said.

By the fire, with whisky and soda, we talked and I told them about it
all.

'Perhaps they'll find the bull,' Pop said. 'We'll offer a reward for the
horns. Have them sent to the Game Department. How big is your biggest
one?'

'Fifty-two.'

'Over the curve?'

'Yes. Maybe he's a little better.'

'Inches don't mean anything,' Pop said. 'They're damned wonderful kudu.'

'Sure. But why does he have to beat me so _bloody_ badly?'

'He's got the luck,' Pop said. 'God, what a kudu. I've only seen one
head killed over fifty in my life before. That was up on Kalal.'

'We knew he had it when we left the other camp. The lorry came in and
told us,' P.O.M. said. 'I've spent all my time praying for you. Ask Mr.
J. P.'

'You'll never know what it meant to see that car come into the firelight
with those damned horns sticking out,' Pop said. 'You old bastard.'

'It's wonderful,' P.O.M. said. 'Let's go and look at them again.'

'You can always remember how you shot them. That's what you really get
out of it,' Pop said. 'They're damned wonderful kudu.'

But I was bitter and I was bitter all night long. In the morning,
though, it was gone. It was all gone and I have never had it again.

Pop and I were up and looking at the heads before breakfast. It was a
grey, overcast morning and cold. The rains were coming.

'They're three marvellous kudu,' he said.

'They look all right with the big one this morning,' I said. They did,
too, strangely enough. I had accepted the big one now and was happy to
see him and that Karl had him. When you put them side by side they
looked all right. They really did. They all were big.

'I'm glad you're feeling better,' Pop said. 'I'm feeling better myself.'

'I'm really glad he has him,' I said truly. 'Mine'll hold me.'

'We have very primitive emotions,' he said. 'It's impossible not to be
competitive. Spoils everything, though.'

'I'm all through with that,' I said. 'I'm all right again. I had quite a
trip, you know.'

'Did you not,' said Pop.

'Pop, what does it mean when they shake hands and get hold of your thumb
and pull it?'

'It's on the order of blood brotherhood but a little less formal. Who's
been doing that to you?'

'Everybody but Kamau.'

'You're getting to be a hell of a fellow,' Pop said. 'You must be an old
timer out here. Tell me, are you much of a tracker and bird shot?'

'Go to hell.'

'M'Cola has been doing that with you too?'

'Yes.'

'Well, well,' said Pop. 'Let's get the little Memsahib and have some
breakfast. Not that I'm feeling up to it.'

'I am,' I said. 'I haven't eaten anything since day before yesterday.'

'Drank some beer though, didn't you?'

'Ah, yes.'

'Beer's a food,' Pop said.

We got the little Memsahib and old Karl and had a very jolly breakfast.

       *       *       *       *       *

A month later P.O.M., Karl, and Karl's wife who had come out and joined
us at Haifa, were sitting in the sun against a stone wall by the Sea of
Galilee eating some lunch and drinking a bottle of wine and watching the
grebes out on the lake. The hills made shadows on the water, which was
flat calm and rather stagnant looking. There were many grebes, making
spreading wakes in the water as they swam, and I was counting them and
wondering why they never were mentioned in the Bible. I decided that
those people were not naturalists.

'I'm not going to walk on it,' Karl said, looking out at the dreary
lake. 'It's been done already.'

'You know,' P.O.M. said, 'I can't remember it. I can't remember Mr. J.
P.'s face. And he's beautiful. I think about him and think about him
and I can't see him. It's terrible. He isn't the way he looks in a
photograph. In a little while I won't be able to remember him at all.
Already I can't see him.'

'You must remember him,' Karl said to her.

'I can remember him,' I said. 'I'll write you a piece some time and put
him in.'

       *       *       *       *       *

TRANSCRIBER NOTES:

    Obvious punctuation errors have been corrected to match the rest of
    the text.

    Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation of words has been retained
    with the exception of those listed below.

    Page 56: may => many (There were numbers of rhino trails there in
    the woods and many strawy piles of dung).

    Page 98: M'cola => M'Cola ('Nyati,' M'Cola whispered. 'Buffalo.')

    Page 114: Dont => Don't ('Don't try anything fancy,').

    Page 182: plums => plumes (Garrick walked off, his plumes waving.)

    Page 214: 'Cola => M'Cola (M'Cola did not take him seriously and
    handed him to one of the Masai.)

    Page 260: bood => blood (pointing with a grass stem at the spots to
    save talking, until it ran out again and you marked the last blood
    with your eye).


[The end of _Green Hills of Africa_ by Ernest Hemingway]




Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteer.





  in our time




  the author _wood-cut from portrait by_ henry strater




  in our time

  _by_

  ernest hemingway

        A Girl in Chicago: Tell us about
        the French women, Hank. What are
        they like?

        Bill Smith: How old are the French
        women, Hank?

  paris:

  _printed at the_ three mountains press _and for sale
  at_ shakespeare & company, _in the rue de l’odéon;_
  _london:_ william jackson, _took's court, cursitor street, chancery lane._

  1924




  to
  robert mᶜalmon and william bird
  _publishers of the city of paris_
  and to
  captain eric edward dorman-smith, m.c.,
  _of his majesty’s fifth fusiliers_
  this book
  is respectfully dedicated




  _of_ 170 _copies_
  _printed on_
  rives _hand-made paper_
  _this is number_




  in our time




  chapter 1


Everybody was drunk. The whole battery was drunk going along the road
in the dark. We were going to the Champagne. The lieutenant kept
riding his horse out into the fields and saying to him, “I’m drunk, I
tell you, mon vieux. Oh, I am so soused.” We went along the road all
night in the dark and the adjutant kept riding up alongside my
kitchen and saying, “You must put it out. It is dangerous. It will be
observed.” We were fifty kilometers from the front but the adjutant
worried about the fire in my kitchen. It was funny going along that
road. That was when I was a kitchen corporal.




  chapter 2


The first matador got the horn through his sword hand and the crowd
hooted him out. The second matador slipped and the bull caught him
through the belly and he hung on to the horn with one hand and held
the other tight against the place, and the bull rammed him wham
against the wall and the horn came out, and he lay in the sand, and
then got up like crazy drunk and tried to slug the men carrying him
away and yelled for his sword but he fainted. The kid came out and
had to kill five bulls because you can’t have more than three
matadors, and the last bull he was so tired he couldn’t get the sword
in. He couldn’t hardly lift his arm. He tried five times and the
crowd was quiet because it was a good bull and it looked like him or
the bull and then he finally made it. He sat down in the sand and
puked and they held a cape over him while the crowd hollered and
threw things down into the bull ring.




  chapter 3


Minarets stuck up in the rain out of Adrianople across the mud flats.
The carts were jammed for thirty miles along the Karagatch road.
Water buffalo and cattle were hauling carts through the mud. No end
and no beginning. Just carts loaded with everything they owned. The
old men and women, soaked through, walked along keeping the cattle
moving. The Maritza was running yellow almost up to the bridge. Carts
were jammed solid on the bridge with camels bobbing along through
them. Greek cavalry herded along the procession. Women and kids were
in the carts crouched with mattresses, mirrors, sewing machines,
bundles. There was a woman having a kid with a young girl holding a
blanket over her and crying. Scared sick looking at it. It rained all
through the evacuation.




  chapter 4


We were in a garden at Mons. Young Buckley came in with his patrol
from across the river. The first German I saw climbed up over the
garden wall. We waited till he got one leg over and then potted him.
He had so much equipment on and looked awfully surprised and fell
down into the garden. Then three more came over further down the
wall. We shot them. They all came just like that.




  chapter 5


It was a frightfully hot day. We’d jammed an absolutely perfect
barricade across the bridge. It was simply priceless. A big old
wrought iron grating from the front of a house. Too heavy to lift and
you could shoot through it and they would have to climb over it. It
was absolutely topping. They tried to get over it, and we potted them
from forty yards. They rushed it, and officers came out alone and
worked on it. It was an absolutely perfect obstacle. Their officers
were very fine. We were frightfully put out when we heard the flank
had gone, and we had to fall back.




  chapter 6


They shot the six cabinet ministers at half-past six in the morning
against the wall of a hospital. There were pools of water in the
courtyard. There were wet dead leaves on the paving of the courtyard.
It rained hard. All the shutters of the hospital were nailed shut.
One of the ministers was sick with typhoid. Two soldiers carried him
downstairs and out into the rain. They tried to hold him up against
the wall but he sat down in a puddle of water. The other five stood
very quietly against the wall. Finally the officer told the soldiers
it was no good trying to make him stand up. When they fired the first
volley he was sitting down in the water with his head on his knees.




  chapter 7


Nick sat against the wall of the church where they had dragged him to
be clear of machine gun fire in the street. Both legs stuck out
awkwardly. He had been hit in the spine. His face was sweaty and
dirty. The sun shone on his face. The day was very hot. Rinaldi, big
backed, his equipment sprawling, lay face downward against the wall.
Nick looked straight ahead brilliantly. The pink wall of the house
opposite had fallen out from the roof, and an iron bedstead hung
twisted toward the street. Two Austrian dead lay in the rubble in the
shade of the house. Up the street were other dead. Things were
getting forward in the town. It was going well. Stretcher bearers
would be along any time now. Nick turned his head carefully and
looked down at Rinaldi. “Senta Rinaldi. Senta. You and me we’ve made
a separate peace.” Rinaldi lay still in the sun breathing with
difficulty. “Not patriots.” Nick turned his head carefully away
smiling sweatily. Rinaldi was a disappointing audience.




  chapter 8


While the bombardment was knocking the trench to pieces at Fossalta,
he lay very flat and sweated and prayed oh jesus christ get me out of
here. Dear jesus please get me out. Christ please please please
christ. If you’ll only keep me from getting killed I’ll do anything
you say. I believe in you and I’ll tell everyone in the world that
you are the only thing that matters. Please please dear jesus. The
shelling moved further up the line. We went to work on the trench and
in the morning the sun came up and the day was hot and muggy and
cheerful and quiet. The next night back at Mestre he did not tell the
girl he went upstairs with at the Villa Rossa about Jesus. And he
never told anybody.




  chapter 9


At two o’clock in the morning two Hungarians got into a cigar store
at Fifteenth Street and Grand Avenue. Drevitts and Boyle drove up
from the Fifteenth Street police station in a Ford. The Hungarians
were backing their wagon out of an alley. Boyle shot one off the seat
of the wagon and one out of the wagon box. Drevetts got frightened
when he found they were both dead. Hell Jimmy, he said, you oughtn’t
to have done it. There’s liable to be a hell of a lot of trouble.

—They’re crooks ain’t they? said Boyle. They’re wops ain’t they? Who
the hell is going to make any trouble?

—That’s all right maybe this time, said Drevitts, but how did you
know they were wops when you bumped them?

Wops, said Boyle, I can tell wops a mile off.




  chapter 10


One hot evening in Milan they carried him up onto the roof and he
could look out over the top of the town. There were chimney swifts in
the sky. After a while it got dark and the searchlights came out. The
others went down and took the bottles with them. He and Ag could hear
them below on the balcony. Ag sat on the bed. She was cool and fresh
in the hot night.

Ag stayed on night duty for three months. They were glad to let her.
When they operated on him she prepared him for the operating table,
and they had a joke about friend or enema. He went under the
anæsthetic holding tight on to himself so that he would not blab
about anything during the silly, talky time. After he got on crutches
he used to take the temperature so Ag would not have to get up from
the bed. There were only a few patients, and they all knew about it.
They all liked Ag. As he walked back along the halls he thought of Ag
in his bed.

Before he went back to the front they went into the Duomo and prayed.
It was dim and quiet, and there were other people praying. They
wanted to get married, but there was not enough time for the banns,
and neither of them had birth certificates. They felt as though they
were married, but they wanted everyone to knew about it, and to make
it so they could not lose it.

Ag wrote him many letters that he never got until after the
armistice. Fifteen came in a bunch and he sorted them by the dates
and read them all straight through. They were about the hospital, and
how much she loved him and how it was impossible to get along without
him and how terrible it was missing him at night.

After the armistice they agreed he should go home to get a job so
they might be married. Ag would not come home until he had a good job
and could come to New York to meet her. It was understood he would
not drink, and he did not want to see his friends or anyone in the
States. Only to get a job and be married. On the train from Padova to
Milan they quarrelled about her not being willing to come home at
once. When they had to say good-bye in the station at Padova they
kissed good-bye, but were not finished with the quarrel. He felt sick
about saying good-bye like that.

He went to America on a boat from Genoa. Ag went back to Torre di
Mosta to open a hospital. It was lonely and rainy there, and there
was a battalion of _arditi_ quartered in the town. Living in the
muddy, rainy town in the winter the major of the battalion made love
to Ag, and she had never known Italians before, and finally wrote a
letter to the States that theirs had been only a boy and girl affair.
She was sorry, and she knew he would probably not be able to
understand, but might some day forgive her, and be grateful to her,
and she expected, absolutely unexpectedly, to be married in the
spring. She loved him as always, but she realized now it was only a
boy and girl love. She hoped he would have a great career, and
believed in him absolutely. She knew it was for the best.

The Major did not marry her in the spring, or any other time. Ag
never got an answer to her letter to Chicago about it. A short time
after he contracted gonorrhea from a sales girl from The Fair riding
in a taxicab through Lincoln Park.




  chapter 11


In 1919 he was travelling on the railroads in Italy carrying a square
of oilcloth from the headquarters of the party written in indelible
pencil and saying here was a comrade who had suffered very much under
the whites in Budapest and requesting comrades to aid him in any way.
He used this instead of a ticket. He was very shy and quite young and
the train men passed him on from one crew to another. He had no
money, and they fed him behind the counter in railway eating houses.

He was delighted with Italy. It was a beautiful country he said. The
people were all kind. He had been in many towns, walked much and seen
many pictures. Giotto, Masaccio, and Piero della Francesca he bought
reproductions of and carried them wrapped in a copy of _Avanti_.
Mantegna he did not like.

He reported at Bologna, and I took him with me up into the Romagna
where it was necessary I go to see a man. We had a good trip
together. It was early September and the country was pleasant. He was
a Magyar, a very nice boy and very shy. Horthy’s men had done some
bad things to him. He talked about it a little. In spite of Italy, he
believed altogether in the world revolution.

—But how is the movement going in Italy? he asked.

—Very badly, I said.

—But it will go better, he said. You have everything here. It is the
one country that everyone is sure of. It will be the starting point
of everything.

At Bologna he said good-bye to us to go on the train to Milano and
then to Aosta to walk over the pass into Switzerland. I spoke to him
about the Mantegnas in Milano. No, he said, very shyly, he did not
like Mantegna. I wrote out for him where to eat in Milano and the
addresses of comrades. He thanked me very much, but his mind was
already looking forward to walking over the pass. He was very eager
to walk over the pass while the weather held good. The last I heard
of him the Swiss had him in jail near Sion.




  chapter 12


They whack whacked the white horse on the legs and he knee-ed himself
up. The picador twisted the stirrups straight and pulled and hauled
up into the saddle. The horse’s entrails hung down in a blue bunch
and swung backward and forward as he began to canter, the _monos_
whacking him on the back of his legs with the rods. He cantered
jerkily along the barrera. He stopped stiff and one of the _monos_
held his bridle and walked him forward. The picador kicked in his
spurs, leaned forward and shook his lance at the bull. Blood pumped
regularly from between the horse’s front legs. He was nervously
wobbly. The bull could not make up his mind to charge.




  chapter 13


The crowd shouted all the time and threw pieces of bread down into
the ring, then cushions and leather wine bottles, keeping up
whistling and yelling. Finally the bull was too tired from so much
bad sticking and folded his knees and lay down and one of the
_cuadrilla_ leaned out over his neck and killed him with the
_puntillo_. The crowd came over the barrera and around the torero and
two men grabbed him and held him and some one cut off his pigtail and
was waving it and a kid grabbed it and ran away with it. Afterwards I
saw him at the café. He was very short with a brown face and quite
drunk and he said after all it has happened before like that. I am
not really a good bull fighter.




  chapter 14


If it happened right down close in front of you, you could see
Villalta snarl at the bull and curse him, and when the bull charged
he swung back firmly like an oak when the wind hits it, his legs
tight together, the muleta trailing and the sword following the curve
behind. Then he cursed the bull, flopped the muleta at him, and swung
back from the charge his feet firm, the muleta curving and each swing
the crowd roaring.

When he started to kill it was all in the same rush. The bull looking
at him straight in front, hating. He drew out the sword from the
folds of the muleta and sighted with the same movement and called to
the bull, Toro! Toro! and the bull charged and Villalta charged and
just for a moment they became one. Villalta became one with the bull
and then it was over. Villalta standing straight and the red kilt of
the sword sticking out dully between the bull’s shoulders. Villalta,
his hand up at the crowd and the bull roaring blood, looking straight
at Villalta and his legs caving.




  chapter 15


I heard the drums coming down the street and then the fifes and the
pipes and then they came around the corner, all dancing. The street
full of them. Maera saw him and then I saw him. When they stopped the
music for the crouch he hunched down in the street with them all and
when they started it again he jumped up and went dancing down the
street with them. He was drunk all right.

You go down after him, said Maera, he hates me.

So I went down and caught up with them and grabbed him while he was
crouched down waiting for the music to break loose and said, Come on
Luis. For Christ sake you’ve got bulls this afternoon. He didn’t
listen to me, he was listening so hard for the music to start.

I said, Don’t be a damn fool Luis. Come on back to the hotel.

Then the music started up again and he jumped up and twisted away
from me and started dancing. I grabbed his arm and he pulled loose
and said, Oh leave me alone. You’re not my father.

I went back to the hotel and Maera was on the balcony looking out to
see if I’d be bringing him back. He went inside when he saw me and
came downstairs disgusted.

Well, I said, after all he’s just an ignorant Mexican savage.

Yes, Maera said, and who will kill his bulls after he gets a
_cogida?_

We, I suppose, I said.

Yes, we, said Maera. We kills the savages’ bulls, and the drunkards’
bulls, and the _riau-riau_ dancers’ bulls. Yes. We kill them. We kill
them all right. Yes. Yes. Yes.




  chapter 16


Maera lay still, his head on his arms, his face in the sand. He felt
warm and sticky from the bleeding. Each time he felt the horn coming.
Sometimes the bull only bumped him with his head. Once the horn went
all the way through him and he felt it go into the sand. Someone had
the bull by the tail. They were swearing at him and flopping the cape
in his face. Then the bull was gone. Some men picked Maera up and
started to run with him toward the barriers through the gate out the
passage way around under the grand stand to the infirmary. They laid
Maera down on a cot and one of the men went out for the doctor. The
others stood around. The doctor came running from the corral where he
had been sewing up picador horses. He had to stop and wash his hands.
There was a great shouting going on in the grandstand overhead. Maera
wanted to say something and found he could not talk. Maera felt
everything getting larger and larger and then smaller and smaller.
Then it got larger and larger and larger and then smaller and
smaller. Then everything commenced to run faster and faster as when
they speed up a cinematograph film. Then he was dead.




  chapter 17


They hanged Sam Cardinella at six o’clock in the morning in the
corridor of the county jail. The corridor was high and narrow with
tiers of cells on either side. All the cells were occupied. The men
had been brought in for the hanging. Five men sentenced to be hanged
were in the five top cells. Three of the men to be hanged were
negroes. They were very frightened. One of the white men sat on his
cot with his head in his hands. The other lay flat on his cot with a
blanket wrapped around his head.

They came out onto the gallows through a door in the wall. There were
six or seven of them including two priests. They were carrying Sam
Cardinella. He had been like that since about four o’clock in the
morning.

While they were strapping his legs together two guards held him up
and the two priests were whispering to him. “Be a man, my son,” said
one priest. When they came toward him with the cap to go over his
head Sam Cardinella lost control of his sphincter muscle. The guards
who had been holding him up dropped him. They were both disgusted.
“How about a chair, Will?” asked one of the guards, “Better get one,”
said a man in a derby hat.

When they all stepped back on the scaffolding back of the drop, which
was very heavy, built of oak and steel and swung on ball bearings,
Sam Cardinella was left sitting there strapped tight, the younger of
the two priests kneeling beside the chair. The priest skipped back
onto the scaffolding just before the drop fell.




  chapter 18


The king was working in the garden. He seemed very glad to see me. We
walked through the garden. This is the queen, he said. She was
clipping a rose bush. Oh how do you do, she said. We sat down at a
table under a big tree and the king ordered whiskey and soda. We have
good whiskey anyway, he said. The revolutionary committee, he told
me, would not allow him to go outside the palace grounds. Plastiras
is a very good man I believe, he said, but frightfully difficult. I
think he did right though shooting those chaps. If Kerensky had shot
a few men things might have been altogether different. Of course the
great thing in this sort of an affair is not to be shot oneself!

It was very jolly. We talked for a long time. Like all Greeks he
wanted to go to America.




  Here ends _The Inquest_ into the state
  of contemporary English prose, as
  edited by Ezra Pound and printed at
  the Three Mountains Press. The six
  works constituting the series are:

  Indiscretions _of_ Ezra Pound

  Women and Men _by_ Ford Madox Ford

  Elimus _by_ B. C. Windeler
     with Designs _by_ D. Shakespear

  The Great American Novel
     _by_ William Carlos Williams

  England _by_ B.M.G.-Adams

  In Our Time _by_ Ernest Hemingway
     with Portrait _by_ Henry Strater





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of In Our Time, by Ernest Hemingway

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN OUR TIME ***

***** This file should be named 61085-0.txt or 61085-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/0/8/61085/

Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteer.
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA 



ERNEST HEMINGWAY 


He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in 
the Guff Stream and he had gone eighty-four days now 
without taking a fish. In the first forty days a boy had 
been with him. But after forty days without a fish the 
boy’s parents had told him that the old man was now 
definitely and finally salao, which is the worst form of 
unlucky, and the boy had gone at their orders in an- 
other boat which caught three good fish the first week. 
It made the boy sad to see the old man come in each 
day with his skiff empty and he always went down to 
help him carry either the coiled lines or the gaff and 
harpoon and the sail that was furled around the mast. 
The sail was patched with flour sacks and, furled, it 
looked like the flag of permanent defeat. 

The old man was thin and gaunt with deep wrinkles 
in the back of his neck. The brown blotches of the 
benevolent skin cancer the sun brings from its 


9 


The Old Man and the Sea 


reflection on the tropic sea were on his cheeks. The 
blotches ran well down the sides of his face and his 
hands had the deep-creased scars from handling heavy 
fish on the cords. But none of these scars were fresh. 
They were as old as erosions in a fishless desert. 

Everything about him was old except his eyes and 
they were the same color as the sea and were cheerful 
and undefeated. 

“Santiago,” the boy said to him as they climbed the 
bank from where the skiff was hauled up. “I could go 
with you again. We’ve made some money.” 

The old man had taught the boy to fish and the boy 
loved him. 

“No,” the old man said. “You’re with a lucky boat. 
Stay with them!” 

“But remember how you went eighty-seven days 
without fish and then we caught big ones every day for 
three weeks.” 

“I remember,” the old man said. “I know you did 
not leave me because you doubted.” 

“It was papa made me leave. I am a boy and I must 
obey him.” 

“I know,” the old man said. “It is quite normal.” 

“He hasn’t much faith.” 

lo 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“No,” the old man said. “But we have. Haven’t 
we?” 

“Yes,” the boy said. “Can I offer you a beer on the 
Terrace and then we’ll take the stuff home.” 

“Why not?” the old man said. “Between fishermen.” 

They sat on the Terrace and many of the fishermen 
made fun of the old man and he was not angry. 
Others, of the older fishermen, looked at him and were 
sad. But they did not show it and they spoke politely 
about the current and the depths they had drifted their 
lines at and the steady good weather and of what they 
had seen. The successful fishermen of that day were 
already in and had butchered their marlin out and car- 
ried them laid full length across two planks, with two 
men staggering at the end of each plank, to the fish 
house where they waited for the ice truck to carry 
them to the market in Havana. Those who had caught 
sharks had taken them to the shark factory on the 
other side of the cove where they were hoisted on a 
block and tackle, their livers removed, their fins cut off 
and their hides skinned out and their flesh cut into 
strips for salting. 

When the wind was in the east a smell came across 
the harbour from the shark factory; but today there 

1 1 


The Old Man and the Sea 

was only the faint edge of the odour because the wind 
had backed into the north and then dropped oft' and it 
was pleasant and sunny on the Terrace. 

“Santiago,” the boy said. 

“Yes,” the old man said. He was holding his glass 
and thinking of many years ago. 

“Can I go out to get sardines for you for tomorrow^” 

“No. Go and play baseball. I can still row and Ro- 
gelio will throw the net.” 

“I would like to go. If I cannot fish with you, I 
would like to serve in some way.” 

“You bought me a beer,” the old man said. “You are 
already a man.” 

“How old was I when you first took me in a boat?” 

“Five and you nearly were killed when I brought the 
fish in too green and he nearly tore the boat to pieces. 
Can you rem-ember?” 

“I can remember the tail slapping and banging and 
the thwart breaking and the noise of the clubbing. I 
can remember you throwing me into the bow where 
the wet coiled lines were and feeling the whole boat 
shiver and the noise of you clubbing him like chopping 
a tree down and the sweet blood smell all over me.” 


12 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“Can you really remember that or did I just tell it to 
you?” 

“I remember everything from when we first went to- 
gether.” 

The old man looked at him with his sun-burned, 
confident loving eyes. 

“If you were my boy I’d take you out and gamble,” 
he said. “But you are your father’s and your mother’s 
and you are in a lucky boat.” 

“May I get the sardines? I know where I can get 
four baits too.” 

“I have mine left from today. I put them in salt in 
the box.” 

“Let me get four fresh ones.” 

“One,” the old man said. His hope and his 
confidence had never gone. But now they were freshen- 
ing as when the breeze rises. 

‘Two,” the boy said. 

“Two,” the old man agreed. “You didn’t steal 
them?” 

“I would,” the boy said. “But I bought these.” 

“Thank you,” the old man said. He was too simple 
to wonder when he had attained humility. But he 


3 


The Old Man and the Sea 

knew he had attained it and he knew it was not dis- 
graceful and it carried no loss of true pride. 

“Tomorrow is going to be a good day with this cur- 
rent,” he said. 

“Where are you going?” the boy asked. 

“Far out to come in when the wind shifts. I want to 
be out before it is light.” 

“Ill try to get him to work far out,” the boy said. 
“Then if you hook something truly big we can come to 
your aid.” 

“He does not like to work too far out.” 

“No,” the boy said. “But I will see something that 
he cannot see such as a bird working and get him to 
come out after dolphin.” 

“Are his eyes that bad?” 

“He is almost blind.” 

“It is strange,” the old man said. “He never went 
turtle-ing. That is what kills the eyes.” 

“But you went turtle-ing for years off the Mosquito 
Coast and your eyes are good.” 

“I am a strange old man.” 

“But are you strong enough now for a truly big 
hsh?” 

“I think so. And there are many tricks.” 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“Let us take the stuff home,” the hoy said. “So I can 
get the cast net and go after the sardines.” 

They picked up the gear from the boat. The old 
man carried the mast on his shoulder and the boy car- 
ried the wooden box; with the coiled, hard-braided 
brown lines, the gaff and the harpoon with its shaft. 
The box with the baits was under the stem of the skiff 
along with the club that was used to subdue the big 
fish when they were brought alongside. No one would 
steal from the old man but it was better to take the sail 
and the heavy lines home as the dew was bad for them 
and, though he was quite sure no local people would 
steal from him, the old man thought that a gaff and a 
harpoon were needless temptations to leave in a boat. 

They walked up the road together to the old man’s 
shack and went in through its open door. The old man 
leaned the mast with its wrapped sail against the wall 
and the boy put the box and the other gear beside it. 
The mast was nearly as long as the one room of the 
shack. The shack was made of the tough budshields of 
the royal palm which are called guano and in it there 
was a bed, a table, one chair, and a place on the dirt 
floor to cook with charcoal. On the brown walls of the 
flattened, overlapping leaves of the sturdy fibered 


15 


The Old Man and the Sea 

guano there was a picture in color of the Sacred Heart 
of Jesus and another of the Virgin of Cobre. These 
were relics of his wife. Once there had been a 
tinted photograph of his wife on the wall but he had 
talcen it down because it made him too lonely to see 
it and it was on the shelf in the corner under his clean 
shirt. 

“What do you have to eat?” the boy asked. 

“A pot of yellow rice with fish. Do you want some?” 

“No. I will eat at home. Do you want me to make 
the fire?” 

“No. I will make it later on. Or I may eat the rice 
cold.” 

“May I take the cast net?” 

“Of course.” 

There was no cast net and the boy remembered 
when they had sold it. But they went through this 
fiction every day. There was no pot of yellow rice and 
fish and the boy knew this too. 

“Eighty-five is a lucky number,” the old man said. 
“How would you like to see me bring one in that 
dressed out over a thousand pounds?” 

“Ell get the cast net and go for sardines. Will you sit 
in the sun in the doorway?” 


i6 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“Yes. I have yesterday’s paper and I will read the 
baseball.” 

The boy did not know whether yesterday’s paper 
was a fiction too. But the old man brought it out from 
under the bed. 

“Perico gave it to me at the hodega,” he explained. 

“I’ll he back when I have the sardines. I’ll keep 
yours and mine together on ice and we can share them 
in the morning. When I come back you can tell me 
about the baseball.” 

“The Yankees cannot lose.” 

“But I fear the Indians of Cleveland.” 

“Have faith in the Yankees my son. Think of the 
great DiMaggio.” 

“I fear both the Tigers of Detroit and the Indians of 
Cleveland.” 

“Be careful or you will fear even the Reds of Cincin- 
nati and the White Sox of Chicago.” 

“You study it and tell me when I come back.” 

“Do you think we should buy a terminal of the lot- 
tery with an eighty-five? Tomorrow is the eighty-fifth 
day.” 

“We can do that,” the boy said. “But what about the 
eighty-seven of your great record?” 


17 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“It could not happen twice. Do you think you can 
find an eighty-five?” 

“I can order one.” 

“One sheet. That’s two dollars and a half. Who can 
we borrow that from?” 

“That’s easy. I can always borrow two dollars and a 
half.” 

“I think perhaps I can too. But I try not to borrow. 
First you borrow. Then you beg.” 

“Keep warm old man,” the boy said. “Remember we 
are in September.” 

“The month when the great fish come,” the old man 
said. “Anyone can be a fisherman in May.” 

“I go now for the sardines,” the boy said. 

When the hoy came back the old man was asleep in 
the chair and the sun was down. The boy took the old 
army blanket off the bed and spread it over the back of 
the chair and over the old man’s shoulders. They were 
strange shoulders, still powerful although very old, and 
the neck was still strong too and the creases did not 
show so much when the old man was asleep and his 
head fallen forward. His shirt had been patched so 
many times that it was like the sail and the patches 
were faded to many different shades by the sun. The 


i8 


The Old Man and the Sea 


old man’s head was very old though and with his eyes 
closed there was no life in his face. The newspaper lay 
across his knees and the weight of his arm held it there 
in the evening breeze. He was barefooted. 

The boy left him there and when he came back the 
old man was still asleep. 

‘Wake up old man,” the boy said and put his hand 
on one of the old man’s knees. 

The old man opened his eyes and for a moment he 
was coming back from a long way away. Then he 
smiled. 

“What have you got?” he asked. 

“Supper,” said the boy. “We’re going to have sup- 
per.” 

“I’m not very hungry.” 

“Come on and eat. You can’t fish and not eat.” 

“I have,” the old man said getting up and taking the 
newspaper and folding it. Then he started to fold the 
blanket. 

“Keep the blanket around you,” the boy said. 
“You’ll not fish without eating while I’m alive.” 

“Then live a long time and take care of yourself,” 
the old man said. “What are we eating?” 

“Black beans and rice, fried bananas, and some 
stew. 


19 


The Old Man and the Sea 


The hoy had brought them in a two-decker metal 
container from the Terrace. The two sets of knives and 
forks and spoons were in his pocket with a paper nap- 
kin wrapped around each set. 

‘'Who gave this to you?” 

“Martin. The owner.” 

“I must thank him.” 

“I thanked him already,” the boy said. “You don’t 
need to thank him.” 

“I’ll give him the belly meat of a big fish,” the old 
man said. “Has he done this for us more than once?” 

“I think so.” 

“I must give him something more than the helly 
meat then. He is very thoughtful for us.” 

“He sent two beers.” 

“I like the beer in cans best.” 

“I know. But this is in bottles, Hatuey beer, and I 
take back the bottles.” 

“That’s very kind of you,” the old man said. 
“Should we eat?” 

“I’ve been asking you to,” the boy told him gently. 
“I have not wished to open the container until you 
were ready.” 


20 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“I’m ready now,” the old man said. “I only needed 
time to wash.” 

Where did you wash? the boy thought. The village 
water supply was two streets down the road. I must 
have water here for him, the boy thought, and soap 
and a good towel. Why am I so thoughtless? I must get 
him another shirt and a jacket for the winter and some 
sort of shoes and another blanket. 

“Your stew is excellent,” the old man said. 

“Tell me about the baseball,” the boy asked him. 

“In the American League it is the Yankees as I 
said,” the old man said happily. 

“They lost today,” the boy told him. 

“That means nothing. The great DiMaggio is him- 
self again.” 

“They have other men on the team.” 

“Naturally. But he makes the difFerence. In the 
other league, between Brooklyn and Philadelphia I 
must take Brooklyn. But then I think of Dick Sisler 
and those great drives in the old park.” 

“There was nothing ever like them. He hits the long- 
est ball I have ever seen.” 

“Do you remember when he used to come to the Ter- 


21 


The Old Man and the Sea 

race? I wanted to take him fishing but I was too timid 
to ask him. Then I asked you to ask him and you were 
too timid.” 

“I know. It was a great mistake. He might have 
gone with us. Then we would have that for all of our 
lives.” 

“I would like to take the great DiMaggio fishing,” 
the old man said. “They s.ay his father was a fisher- 
man. Maybe he was as poor as we are and would 
understand.” 

“The great Sisler’s father was never poor and he, the 
father, was playing in the Big Leagues when he was my 
age. 

“When I was your age I was before the mast on a 
square rigged ship that ran to Africa and I have seen 
lions on the beaches in the evening.” 

“I know. You told me.” 

“Should we talk about Africa or about baseball?” 

“Baseball I think,” the boy said. “Tell me about the 
great John ]. McGraw.” He said Jota for J. 

“He used to come to the Terrace sometimes too in 
the older days. But he was rough and harsh-spoken and 
difficult when he was drinking. His mind was on 
horses as well as baseball. At least he carried lists of 


22 


The Old Man and the Sea 

horses at all times in his pocket and frequently spoke 
the names of horses on the telephone/’ 

“He was a great manager,” the boy said. “My father 
thinks he was the greatest.” 

“Because he came here the most times,” the old man 
said. “If Durocher had continued to come here each 
year your father would think him the greatest man- 
ager.” 

“Who is the greatest manager, really, Luque or Mike 
Gonzalezl^” 

“I think they are equal.” 

“And the best fisherman is you.” 

“No. I know others better.” 

'‘Que va,” the boy said. “There are many good fisher- 
men and some great ones. But there is only you.” 

“Thank you. You make me happy. I hope no fish 
will come along so great that he will prove us wrong.” 

“There is no such fish if you are still strong as you 
say.” 

“I may not be as strong as I think,” the old man 
said. “But I know many tricks and I have resolution.” 

“You ought to go to bed now so that you will be 
fresh in the morning. I will take the things back to the 
Terrace.” 


23 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“Good night then. I will wake you in the morning.’’ 

“You’re my alarm clock,” the boy said. 

“Age is my alarm clock,” the old man said. “Why do 
old men wake so early? Is it to have one longer day?” 

“I don’t know,” the boy said. “All I know is that 
young boys sleep late and hard.” 

“I can remember it,” the old man said. “I’ll waken 
you in time.” 

“I do not like for him to waken me. It is as though I 
were inferior.” 

“I know.” 

“Sleep well old man.” 

The boy went out. They had eaten with no light on 
the table and the old man took off his trousers and 
went to bed in the dark. He rolled his trousers up to 
make a pillow, putting the newspaper inside them. He 
rolled himself in the blanket and slept on the other old 
newspapers that covered the springs of the bed. 

He was asleep in a short time and he dreamed of 
Africa when he was a boy and the long golden beaches 
and the white beaches, so white they hurt your eyes, 
and the high capes and the great brown mountains. He 
lived along that coast now every night and in his 
dreams he heard the surf roar and saw the native boats 


24 


The Old Man and the Sea 


come riding through it. He smelled the tar and oakum 
of the deck as he slept and he smelled the smell of 
Africa that the land breeze brought at morning. 

Usually when he smelled the land breeze he woke 
up and dressed to go and wake the boy. But tonight the 
smell of the land breeze came very early and he knew 
it was too early in his dream and went on dreaming to 
see the white peaks of the Islands rising from the sea 
and then he dreamed of the different harbours and 
roadsteads of the Canary Islands. 

He no longer dreamed of storms, nor of women, nor 
of great occurrences, nor of great fish, nor fights, nor 
contests of strength, nor of his wife. He only dreamed 
of places now and of the lions on the beach. They 
played like young cats in the dusk and he loved them 
as he loved the boy. He never dreamed about the boy. 
He simply woke, looked out the open door at the moon 
and unrolled his trousers and put them on. He 
urinated outside the shack and then went up the road 
to wake the boy. He was shivering with the morning 
cold. But he knew he would shiver himself warm and 
that soon he would be rowing. 

The door of the house where the boy lived was un- 
locked and he opened it and walked in quietly with his 


25 


The Old Man and the Sea 

bare feet. The boy was asleep on a cot in the first room 
and the old man could see him clearly with the light 
that came in from the dying moon. He took hold of one 
foot gently and held it until the boy woke and turned' 
and looked at him. The old man nodded and the boy 
took his trousers from the chair by the bed and, sitting 
on the bed, pulled them on. 

The old man went out the door and the boy came 
after him. He was sleepy and the old man put his arm 
across his shoulders and said, “I am sorry." 

"Que va” the boy said. ‘It is what a man must 
do." 

They walked down the road to the old man’s shack 
and all along the road, in the dark, barefoot men were 
moving, carrying the masts of their boats. 

When they reached the old man’s shack the boy 
took the rolls of line in the basket and the harpoon and 
garf and the old man carried the mast with the furled 
sail on his shoulder. 

"Do you want coffee?" the boy asked. 

“We’ll put the gear in the boat and then get some." 

They had coffee from condensed milk cans at an 
early morning place that served fishermen. 

“How did you sleep old man?" the boy asked. He 


26 


The Old Man and the Sea 


was waking up now although it was still hard for him 
to leave his sleep. 

“Very well, Manolin,” the old man said. “I feel 
confident today.” 

“So do I,” the boy said. “Now I must get your sar- 
dines and mine and your fresh baits. He brings our 
gear himself. He never wants anyone to carry any- 
thing.” 

“We're different,” the old man said. “I let you carry 
things when you were five years old.” 

“I know it,” the boy said. “I’ll be right back. Have 
another coffee. We have credit here.” 

He walked off, bare-footed on the coral rocks, to the 
ice house where the baits were stored. 

The old man drank his coffee slowly. It was all he 
would have all day and he knew that he should take it. 
For a long time now eating had bored him and he 
never carried a lunch. He had a bottle of water in the 
bow of the skiff and that was all he needed for the day. 

The boy was back now with the sardines and the 
two baits wrapped in a newspaper and they went down 
the trail to the skiff, feeling the pebbled sand under 
their feet, and lifted the skiff and slid her into the w^a- 
ter. 


27 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“Good luck old man.” 

“Good luck,” the old man said. He fitted the rope 
lashings of the oars onto the thole pins and, leaning 
forward against the thrust of the blades in the water, 
he began to row out of the harbour in the dark. There 
were other boats from the other beaches going out to 
sea and the old man heard the dip and push of their 
oars even though he could not see them now the moon 
was below the hills. 

Sometimes someone would speak in a boat. But most 
of the boats were silent except for the dip of the oars. 
They spread apart after they were out of the mouth of 
the harbour and each one headed for the part of the 
ocean where he hoped to find fish. The old man knew 
he was going far out and he left the smell of the land 
behind and rowed out into the clean early morning 
smell of the ocean. He saw the phosphorescence of the 
Gulf weed in the water as he rowed over the part of 
the ocean that the fishermen called the great well be- 
cause there was a sudden deep of seven hundred fath- 
oms where all sorts of fish congregated because of the 
swirl the current made against the steep walls of the 
floor of the ocean. Here there were concentrations of 
shrimp and bait fish and sometimes schools of squid in 


28 


The Old Man and the Sea 

the deepest holes and these rose close to the surface at 
night where all the wandering fish fed on them. 

In the dark the old man could feel the morning com- 
ing and as he rowed he heard the trembling sound as 
flying fish left the water and the hissing that their stiff 
set wings made as they soared away in the darkness. 
He was very fond of flying fish as they were his princi- 
pal friends on the ocean. He was sorry for the birds, 
especially the small delicate dark terns that were al- 
ways flying and looking and almost never finding, and 
he thought, the birds have a harder life than we do 
except for the robber birds and the heavy strong ones. 
Why did they make birds so delicate and fine as those 
sea swallows when the ocean can be so cruel? She is 
kind and very beautiful. But she can be so cruel and it 
comes so suddenly and such birds that fly, dipping and 
hunting, with their small sad voices are made too del- 
icately for the sea. 

He always thought of the sea as la mar which is 
what people call her in Spanish when they love her. 
Sometimes those who love her say bad things of her 
but they are always said as though she were a woman. 
Some of the younger fishermen, those who used buoys 
as floats for their lines and had motorboats, bought 


29 


The Old Man and the Sea 

when the shark livers had brought much money, spoke 
of her as el mar which is masculine. They spoke of her 
as a contestant or a place or even an enemy. But the 
old man always thought of her as feminine and as some- 
thing that gave or withheld great favours, and if she 
did wild or wicked things it was because she could not 
help them. The moon affects her as it does a woman, 
he thought. 

He was rowing steadily and it was no effort for him 
since he kept well within his speed and the surface of 
the ocean was flat except for the occasional swirls of 
the current. He was letting the current do a third of 
the w'ork and as it started to be light he saw he was 
already further out than he had hoped to be at this 
hour. 

I worked the deep wells for a week and did nothing, 
he thought. Today 111 work out where the schools of 
bonito and albacore are and maybe there will be a big 
one with them. 

Before it was really light he had his baits out and 
was drifting with the current. One bait was down 
forty fathoms. The second was at seventy-five and the 
third and fourth were dowm in the blue water at one 


30 


The Old Man and the Sea 

hundred and one hundred and twenty-five fathoms. 
Each bait hung head down with the shank of the hook 
inside the bait fish, tied and sewed solid and all the 
projecting part of the hook, the curve and the point, 
was covered with fresh sardines. Each sardine was 
hooked through both eyes so that they made a half-gar- 
land on the projecting steel. There was no part of the 
hook that a great fish could feel which was not sweet 
smelling and good tasting. 

The boy had given him two fresh small tunas, or 
albacores, which hung on the two deepest lines like 
plummets and, on the others, he had a big blue runner 
and a yellow jack that had been used before; but they 
were in good condition still and had the excellent sar- 
dines to give them scent and attractiveness. Each line, 
as thick around as a big pencil, was looped onto a 
green-sapped stick so that any pull or touch on the bait 
would make the stick dip and each line had two forty- 
fathom coils which could be made fast to the other 
spare coils so that, if it were necessary, a fish could 
take out over three hundred fathoms of line. 

Now the man watched the dip of the three sticks 
over the side of the skiff and rowed gently to keep the 


3 


The Old Man and the Sea 

lines straight up and down and at their proper depths. 
It was quite light and any moment now the sun would 
rise. 

The sun rose thinly from the sea and the old man 
could see the other boats, low on the water and well in 
toward the shore, spread out across the current. Then 
the sun was brighter and the glare came on the water 
and then, as it rose clear, the flat sea sent it back at his 
eyes so that it hurt sharply and he rowed without look- 
ing into it. He looked down into the water and 
watched the lines that went straight down into the 
dark of the water. He kept them straighter than any- 
one did, so that at each level in the darkness of the 
stream there would be a bait waiting exactly where he 
wished it to he for any fish that swam there. Others let 
them drift with the current and sometimes they were 
at sixty fathoms when the fishermen thought they were 
at a hundred. 

But, he thought, I keep them with precision. Only I 
have no luck any more. But who knows? Maybe today. 
Every day is a new day. It is better to be lucky. But I 
would rather be exact. Then when luck comes you are 
ready. 

The sun was two hours higher now and it did not 


32. 


The Old Man and the Sea 


hurt his eyes so much to look into the east. There were 
only three boats in sight now and they showed very low 
and far inshore. 

All my life the early sun has hurt my eyes, he 
thought. Yet they are still good. In the evening I can 
look straight into it without getting the blackness. It 
has more force in the evening too. But in the morning it 
is painful. 

Just then he saw a man-of-war bird with his long 
black wings circling in the sky ahead of him. He made 
a quick drop, slanting down on his back-swept wings, 
and then circled again. 

“He’s got something,” the old man said aloud. “He’s 
not just looking.” 

He rowed slowly and steadily toward where the bird 
was circling. He did not hurry and he kept his lines 
straight up and down. But he crowded the current a 
little so that he was still hshing correctly though faster 
than he would have fished if he was not trying to use 
the bird. 

The bird went higher in the air and circled again, 
his wings motionless. Then he dove suddenly and the 
old man saw flying fish spurt out of the water and sail 
desperately over the surface. 


33 


The Old Man and the Sea 


“Dolphin,” the old man said aloud. “Big dolphin.” 

He shipped his oars and brought a small line from 
under the bow. It had a wire leader and a medium- 
sized hook and he baited it with one of the sardines. 
He let it go over the side and then made it fast to a 
ring bolt in the stern. Then he baited another line and 
left it coiled in the shade of the bow. He went back to 
rowing and to watching the long-winged black bird 
who was working, now, low over the water. 

As he watched the bird dipped again slanting his 
wings for the dive and then swinging them wildly and 
ineffectually as he followed the flying fish. The old 
man could see the slight bulge in the water that the 
big dolphin raised as they followed the escaping fish. 
The dolphin were cutting through the water below the 
flight of the fish and would be in the water, driving at 
speed, when the fish dropped. It is a big school of dol- 
phin, he thought. They are widespread and the flying 
fish have little chance. The bird has no chance. The 
flying fish are too big for him and they go too fast. 

He watched the flying fish burst out again and again 
and the ineffectual movements of the bird. That school 
has gotten away from me, he thought. They are mov- 
ing out too fast and too far. But perhaps I will pick up 


34 


The Old Man and the Sea 


a stray and perhaps my big fish is around them. My big 
fish must be somewhere. 

The clouds over the land now rose like mountains 
and the coast was only a long green line with the gray 
blue hills behind it. The water was a dark blue now, so 
dark that it was almost purple. As he looked down into 
it he saw the red sifting of the plankton in the dark 
water and the strange light the sun made now. He 
watched his lines to see them go straight down out of 
sight into the water and he was happy to see so much 
plankton because it meant fish. The strange light the 
sun made in the water, now that the sun was higher, 
meant good weather and so did the shape of the clouds 
over the land. But the bird was almost out of sight now 
and nothing showed on the surface of the water but 
some patches of yellow, sun-bleached Sargasso weed 
and the purple, formalized, iridescent, gelatinous blad- 
der of a Portuguese man-of-war floating close beside 
the boat. It turned on its side and then righted itself. It 
floated cheerfully as a bubble with ifs long deadly pur- 
ple filaments trailing a yard behind it in the water. 

"Agua mala,” the man said. “You whore.” 

From where he swung lightly against his oars he 
looked down into the water and saw the tiny fish that 


35 


The Old Man and the Sea 

were coloured like die trailing filaments and swam be- 
tween them and under the small shade the bubble 
made as it drifted. They were immune to its poison. 
But men were not and when some of the filaments 
would catch on a line and rest there slimy and purple 
while the old man was working a fish, he would have 
welts and sores on his arms and hands of the sort that 
poison ivy or poison oak can give. But these poisonings 
from the agua mala came quickly and struck like a whip- 
lash. 

The iridescent bubbles were beautiful. But they 
were the falsest thing in the sea and the old man loved 
to see the big sea turtles eating them. The turtles saw 
them, approached them from the front, then shut their 
eyes so they were completely carapaced and ate them 
filaments and all. The old man loved to see the turtles 
eat them and he loved to walk on them on the beach 
after a storm and hear them pop when he stepped on 
them with the horny soles of his feet. 

He loved green turtles and hawk-bills with their ele- 
gance and speed and their great value and he had a 
friendly contempt for the huge, stupid loggerheads, yel- 
low in their armour-plating, strange in their love- 
s'^ 


The Old Man and the Sea 


making, and happily eating the Portuguese men-of-war 
with their eyes shut. 

He had no mysticism about turtles although he had 
gone in turtle boats for many years. He was sorry for 
them all, even the great trunk backs that were as long 
as the skiff and weighed a ton. Most people are heart- 
less about turtles because a turtle’s heart will beat for 
hours after he has been cut up and butchered. But the 
old man thought, I have such a heart too and my feet 
and hands are like theirs. He ate the white eggs to give 
himself strength. He ate them all through May to be 
strong in September and October for the truly big fish. 

He also drank a cup of shark liver oil each day from 
the big drum in the shack where many of the fisher- 
men kept their gear. It was there for all fishermen who 
wanted it. Most fishermen hated the taste. But it was 
no worse than getting up at the hours that they rose 
and it was very good against all colds and grippes and 
it was good for the eyes. 

Now the old man looked up and saw that the bird 
was circling again. 

“He’s found fish,” he said aloud. No flying fish 
broke the surface and there was no scattering of bait 


37 


The Old Man and the Sea 

fish. But as the old man watched, a small tuna rose in 
the air, turned and dropped head first into the water. 
The tuna shone silver in the sun and after he had 
dropped back into the water another and another rose 
and they were jumping in all directions, churning the 
water and leaping in long jumps after the bait. They 
were circling it and driving it. 

If they don’t travel too fast I will get into them, the 
old man thought, and he watched the school working 
the water white and the bird now dropping and dip- 
ping into the bait fish that were forced to the surface 
in their panic. ^ 

“The bird is a great help,” the old man said. Just 
then the stern line came taut under his foot, where he 
had kept a loop of the line, and he dropped his oars 
and felt the weight of the small tuna’s shivering pull as 
he held the line firm and commenced to haul it in. The 
shivering increased as he pulled in and he could see 
the blue back of the fish in the water and the gold of 
his sides before he swung him over the side and into 
the boat. He lay in the stern in the sun, compact and 
bullet shaped, his big, unintelligent eyes staring as he 
thumped his life out against the planking of the boat 
with the quick shivering strokes of his neat, fast-moving 


38 


The Old Man and the Sea 

tail. The old man hit him on the head for kindness and 
kicked him, his body still shuddering, under the shade 
of the stern. 

“Albacore,” he said aloud. “He’ll make a beautiful 
bait. He’ll weigh ten pounds.” 

He did not remember when he had first started to 
talk aloud when he was by himself. He had sung when 
he was by himself in the old days and he had sung at 
night sometimes when he was alone steering on his 
watch in the smacks or in the turtle boats. He had prob- 
ably started to talk aloud, when alone, when the boy 
had left. But he did not remember. When he and the 
boy fished together they usually spoke only when it 
was necessary. They talked at night or when they were 
storm-bound by bad weather. It was considered a virtue 
not to talk unnecessarily at sea and the old man had 
always considered it so and respected it. But now he 
said his thoughts aloud many times since there was no 
one that they could annoy. 

“If the others heard me talking out loud they would 
think that I am crazy,” he said aloud. “But since I am 
not crazy, I do not care. And the rich have radios to 
talk to them in their boats and to bring them the base- 
ball.” 


39 


The Old Man and the Sea 

Now is no time to think of baseball, he thought. 
Now is the time to think of only one thing. That 
which I was born for. There might be a big one around 
that school, he thought. I picked up only a straggler 
from the albacore that were feeding. But they are work- 
ing far out and fast. Everything that shows on the sur- 
face today travels very fast and to the north-east. Can 
that be the time of day? Or is it some sign of weather 
that I do not knovv^? 

He could not see the green of the shore now but 
only the tops of the blue hills that showed white as 
though they were snow-capped and the clouds that 
looked Jike high snow mountains above them. The sea 
was very dark and the light made prisms in the water. 
The myriad flecks of the plankton were annulled now 
by the high sun and it was only the great deep prisms 
in the blue water that the old man saw now with his 
lines going straight down into the water that was a 
mile deep. 

The tuna, the fishermen called all the fish of that 
species tuna and only distinguished among them by 
their proper names when they came to sell them or to 
trade them for baits, were down again. The sun was 


40 


The Old Man and the Sea 


hot now and the old man felt it on the back of his neck 
and felt the sweat trickle down his back as he rowed. 

I could just drift, he thought, and sleep and put a 
bight of line around my toe to wake me. But today is 
eighty-five days and I should fish the day well. 

Just then, watching his lines, he saw one of the pro- 
jecting green sticks dip sharply. 

“Yes,” he said. “Yes,” and shipped his oars without 
bumping the boat. He reached out for the line and 
held it softly between the thumb and forefinger of his 
right hand. He felt no strain nor weight and he held 
the line lightly. Then it came again. This time it was a 
tentative pull, not solid nor heavy, and he knew ex- 
actly what it was. One hundred fathoms down a marlin 
was eating the sardines that covered the point and the 
shank of the hook where the hand-forged hook pro- 
jected from the head of the small tuna^ 

The old man held the line delicately, and softly, with 
his left hand, unleashed it from the stick. Now he 
could let it run through his fingers without the fish 
feeling any tension. 

This far out, he must be huge in this month, he 
thought. Eat them, fish. Eat them. Please eat them. 


41 


The Old Man and the Sea 

How fresh they are and you down there six hundred 
feet in that cold water in the dark. Make another turn 
in the dark and come back and eat them. 

He felt the light delicate pulling and then a harder 
pull when a sardine’s head must have been more 
difficult to break from the hook. Then there was noth- 
ing. 

“Come on,” the old man said aloud. “Make another 
turn. Just smell them. Aren’t they lovely? Eat them 
good now and then there is the tuna. Hard and cold 
and lovely. Don’t be shy, fish. Eat them.” 

He waited with the line between his thumb and his 
finger, watching it and the other lines at the same time 
for the fish might have swum up or down. Then came 
the same delicate pulling touch again. 

“He’ll take it,” the old man said aloud. “God help 
him to take it.” 

He did not take it though. He was gone and the old 
man felt nothing. 

“He can’t have gone,” he said. “Christ knows he 
can’t have gone. He’s making a turn. Maybe he has 
been hooked before and he remembers something of 


42 


The Old Man and the Sea 

Then he felt the gentle touch on the line and he 
was happy. 

“It was only his turn,” he said. “He’ll take it.” 

He was happy feeling the gentle pulling and then 
he felt something hard and unbelievably heavy. It was 
the weight of the fish and he let the line slip down, 
down, down, unrolling off the first of the two reser>;e 
coils. As it went down, slipping lightly through the old 
man’s fingers, he still could feel the great weight, 
though the pressure of his thumb and finger were al- 
most imperceptible. 

“What a fish,” he said. “He has it sideways in his 
mouth now and he is moving off with it.” 

Then he will turn and swallow it, he thought. He 
did not say that because he knew that if you said a 
good thing it might not happen. He knew what a huge 
fish this was and he thought of him moving away in 
the darkness with the tuna held crosswise in his 
mouth. At that moment he felt him stop moving but 
the weight was still there. Then the weight increased 
and he gave more line. He tightened the pressure of 
his thumb and finger for a moment and the weight in- 
creased and was going straight down. 


43 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“He’s taken it,” he said. “Now I’ll let him eat it 
well.” 

He let the line slip through his fingers while he 
reached down with his left hand and made fast the 
free end of the two reserve coils to the loop of the two 
reserve coils of the next line. Now he was ready. He 
had three forty-fathom coils of line in reserve now, as 
well as the coil he was using. 

“Eat it a little more,” he said. “Eat it well.” 

Eat it so that the point of the hook goes into your 
heart and kills you, he thought. Come up easy and let 
me put the harpoon into you. All right. Are you ready? 
Have you been long enough at table? 

“Now!” he said aloud and struck hard with both 
hands, gained a yard of line and then struck again and 
again, swinging with each arm alternately on the cord 
with all the strength of his arms and the pivoted 
weight of his body. 

Nothing happened. The fish just moved away slowly 
and the old man could not raise him an inch. His line 
was strong and made for heavy fish and he held it 
against his back until it was so taut that beads of water 
were jumping from it. Then it began to make a slow 
hissing sound in the water and he still held it, bracing 


44 


The Old Man and the Sea 

himself against the thwart and leaning back against 
the pull. The boat began to move slowly off toward the 
north-west. 

The fish moved steadily and they travelled slovx^ly on 
the calm water. The other baits were still in the water 
but there was nothing to be done. 

“I wish I had the boy/’ the old man said aloud. “I’m 
being towed by a fish and I’m the towing bitt. I could 
make the line fast. But then he could break it. I must 
hold him all I can and give him line when he must 
have it. Thank God he is travelling and not going 
dovi^n.” 

What I will do if he decides to go down, I don’t 
know. What I’ll do if he sounds and dies I don’t know. 
But I’ll do something. There are plenty of things I can 
do. 

He held the line against his back and watched its 
slant in the water and the skiff moving steadily to the 
north-west. 

This will kill him, the old man thought. He can’t do 
this forever. But four hours later the fish was still swim- 
ming steadily out to sea, towing the skiff, and the old 
man was still braced solidly with the line across his 
back. 


45 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“It was noon when I hooked him,” he said. “And I 
have never seen him.” 

He had pushed his straw hat hard down on his head 
before he hooked the fish and it was cutting his fore- 
head. He was thirsty too and he got down on his knees 
and, being careful not to jerk on the line, moved as far 
into the bow as he could get and reached the water 
bottle with one hand. He opened it and drank a little. 
Then he rested against the bow. He rested sitting on the 
un-stepped mast and sail and tried not to think but only 
to endure. 

Then he looked behind him and saw that no land 
was visible. That makes no difference, he thought. I 
can always come in on the glow from Havana. There 
are two more hours before the sun sets and maybe he 
will come up before that. If he doesn’t maybe he will 
come up with the moon. If he does not do that maybe 
he will come up with the sunrise. I have no cramps and 
I feel strong. It is he that has the hook in his mouth. 
But what a fish to pull like that. He must have his 
mouth shut tight on the wire. I wish I could see him. I 
wish I could see him only once to know what I have 
against me. 

The fish never changed his course nor his direction 

46 


The Old Man and the Sea 


all that night as far as the man could tell from watch- 
ing the stars. It was cold after the sun went down and 
the old man’s sweat dried cold on his back and his arms 
and his old legs. During the day he had taken the sack 
that covered the bait box and spread it in the sun to 
dry. After the sun went down he tied it around his 
neck so that it hung down over his back and he cau- 
tiously worked it down under the line that was across 
his shoulders now. The sack cushioned the line and he 
had found a way of leaning forward against the bow so 
that he was almost comfortable. The position actually 
was only somewhat less intolerable; but he thought of 
it as almost comfortable. 

I can do nothing with him and he can do nothing 
with me, he thought. Not as long as he keeps this up. 

Once he stood up and urinat ed over the side of the 
skiff and looked at the stars and checked his course. 
The line showed like a phosphorescgnt streak in the 
water straight out from his shoulders. They were mov- 
ing more slowly now and the glow of Havana was not 
so strong, so that he knew the current must be carrying 
them to the eastward. If I lose the glare of Havana we 
must be going more to the eastward, he thought. For if 
the fish’s course held true I must see it for many more 


47 


The Old Man and the Sea 

hours. I wonder how the baseball came out in the 
grand leagues today, he thought. It would be wonder- 
ful to do this with a radio. Then he thought, think of it 
always. Think of what you are doing. You must do 
nothing stupid. 

Then he said aloud, “I wish I had the boy. To help 
me and to see this.” 

No one should be alone in their old age, he thought. 
But it is unavoidably I must remember to eat the tuna 
before he spoils in order to keep strong. Remember, no 
matter how little you want to, that you must eat him in 
the morning. Remember, he said to himself. 

During the night two porpoises came around the 
boat and he could hear them rolling and blowing. He 
could tell the difference between the blowing noise the 
male made and the sighing blow of the female. 

“They are good,” he said. “They play and make 
jokes and love one another. They are our brothers like 
the flying fish.” 

Then he began to ^ty the great fish that he had 
hooked. He is wonderful and strange and who knows 
how old he is, he thought. Never have I had such a 
strong fish nor one who acted so strangely. Perhaps he 
is too wise to jump. He could ruin me by jumping or 


48 


The Old Man and the Sea 


by a wild rush. But perhaps he has been hooked many 
times before and he knows that this is how he should 
make his fight. He cannot know that it is only one man 
against him, nor that it is an old man. But what a great 
fish he is and what will he bring in the market if the 
flesh is good. He took the bait like a male and he pulls 
like a male and his fight has no panic in it. I wonder if 
he has any plans or if he is just as desperate as I am? 

He remembered the time he had hooked one of a 
pair of marlin. The male fish always let the female fish 
feed first and the hooked fish, the female, made a wild, 
panic-stricken, despairing fight that soon exhausted 
her, and all the time the male had stayed with her, 
crossing the line and circling with her on the surface. 
He had stayed so close that the old man was afraid he 
would cut the line with his tail which was sharp as a 
scythe and almost of that size and shape. When the old 
man had galfed her and clubbed her, holding the 
rapier bill with its sandpaper edge and clubbing her 
across the top of her head until her colour turned to a 
colour almost like the backing of mirrors, and then, 
with the boy’s aid, hoisted her aboard, the male fish 
had stayed by the side of the boat. Then, while the old 
man was clearing the lines and preparing the harpoon, 


49 


The Old Man and the Sea 

the male fish jumped high into the air beside the boat 
to see where the female was and then went down deep, 
his lavender wings, that were his pectoral fins, spread 
wide and all his wide lavender stripes showing. He was 
beautiful, the old man remembered, and he had stayed. 

That was the saddest thing I ever saw with them, 
the old man thought. The boy was sad too and we 
begged her pardon and h^Gheied her promptly. 

“I wish the boy was here,” he said aloud and settled 
himself against the rounded planks of the bow and felt 
the strength of the great fish through the line he held 
across his shoulders moving steadily toward whatever 
he had chosen. 

When once, through my treachery , it had been nec- 
essary to him to make a choice, the old man thought. 

His choice had been to stay in the deep dark water 
far out beyond all snares and traps and X^actysiies. My 
choice was to go there to find him beyond all people. 
Beyond all people in the world. Now we are joined to- 
gether and have been since noon. And no one to help 
either one of us. 

Perhaps I should not have been a fisherman, he 
thought. But that was the thing that I was born for. I 
must surely remember to eat the tuna after it gets light. 


50 


The Old Man and the Sea 


Some time before daylight something took one of the 
baits that were behind him. He heard the stick break 
and the line begin to rush out over the gunwale of the 
skiff. In the darkness he loosened his sheath knife and 
taking all the strain of the fish on his left shoulder he 
leaned back and cut the line against the wood of the 
gunwale. Then he cut the other line closest to him and 
in the dark made the loose ends of the reserve coils 
fast. He worked skillfully with the one hand and put 
his foot on the coils to hold them as he drew his knots 
tight. Now he had six reserve coils of line. There were 
two from each bait he had severed and the two from 
the bait the fish had taken and they were all con- 
nected. 

After it is light, he thought, I will work back to the 
forty-fathom bait and cut it away too and link up the 
reserve coils. I will have lost two hundred fathoms of 
good Catalan carde l and the hooks and leaders. That 
can be replaced. But who replaces this fish if I hook 
some fish and it cuts him off? I don’t know what that 
fish was that took the bait just now. It could have been 
a marlin or a broadbill or a shark. I never felt him. I 
had to get rid of him too fast. 

Aloud he said, “I wish I had the boy.” 


51 


The Old Man and the Sea 

But you haven’t got the boy, he thought. You have 
only yourself and you had better work back to the last 
line now, in the dark or not in the dark, and cut it 
away and hook up the two reserve coils. 

So he did it. It was difficult in the dark and once the 
fish made a surge that pulled him down on his face and 
made a cut below his eye. The blood ran down his 
cheek a little way. But it coagulated and dried before it 
reached his chin and he worked his way back to the 
bow and rested against the wood. He adjusted the sack 
and carefully worked the line so that it came across a 
new part of his shoulders and, holding it anchored 
with his shoulders, he carefully felt the pull of the fish 
and then felt with his hand the progress of the skiff 
through the water. 

I wonder what he made that lurch for, he thought. 
The wire must have slipped on the great hill of his 
back. Certainly his back cannot feel as badly as mine 
does. But he cannot pull this skiff forever, no matter 
how great he is. Now everything is cleared away that 
might make trouble and I have a big reserve of line; all 
that a man can ask. 

“Fish,” he said softly, aloud, “Fll stay with you until 
I am dead.” 


52 


The Old Man and the Sea 

He’ll stay with me too, I suppose, the old man 
thought and he waited for it to be light. It was cold 
now in the time before daylight and he pushed against 
the wood to be warm. I can do it as long as he can, he 
thought. And in the first light the line extended out 
and down into the water. The boat moved steadily and 
when the first edge of the sun rose it was on the old 
man’s right shoulder. 

“He’s headed north,” the old man said. The current 
will have set us far to the^eastward, he thought. I wish 
he would turn with the current. That would show that 
he was tiring. 

When the sun had risen further the old man real- 
ized that the fish was not tiring. There was only one 
favorable sign. The slant of the line showed he was 
swimming at a lesser depth. That did not necessarily 
mean that he would jump. But he might. 

“God let him jump,” the old man said. “I have 
enough line to handle him.” 

Maybe if I can increase the tension just a little it 
will hurt him and he will jump, he thought. Now that 
it is daylight let him jump so that he’ll fill the sacks 
along his backbone with air and then he cannot go 
deep to die. 


53 


The Old Man and the Sea 

He tried to increase the tension, but die line had 
been taut up to the very edge of the breaking point 
since he had hooked the fish and he felt the harshness 
as he leaned back to pull and knew he could put no 
more strain on it. I must not jerk it ever, he thought. 
Each jerk widens the cut the hook makes and then 
when he does jump he might throw it. Anyway I feel 
better with the sun and for once I do not have to look 
into it. 

There was yellow weed on the line but the old man 
knew that only made an added drag and he was 
pleased. It was the yellow Gulf weed that had made so 
much phosphorescence in the night. 

“Fish,” he said, “I love you and respect you very 
much. But I will kill you dead before this day ends.” 

Let us hope so, he thought. 

A small bird came toward the skiff from the north. 
He was a warbler and Hying very low over the water. 
The old man could see that he was very tired. 

The bird made the stern of the boat and rested 
there. Then he fiew around the old man's head and 
rested on the line where he was more comfortable. 

“How old are you?” the old man asked the bird. “Is 
this your first trip?” 


54 


The Old Man and the Sea 

The bird looked at him when he spoke. He was too 
tired even to examine the line and he teetered on it as 
his delicate feet gripped it fast. 

“It’s steady,” the old man told him. “It’s too steady. 
You shouldn’t be that tired after a windless night. 
What are birds coming to?” 

The hawks, he thought, that come out to sea to meet 
them. But he said nothing of this to the bird who could 
not understand him anyway and who would learn 
about the hawks soon enough. 

“Take a good rest, small bird,” he said. “Then go in 
and take your chance like any man or bird or fish.” 

It encou ra ged him to talk because his back had 
stiffened in the night and it hurt truly now. 

“Stay at my house if you like, bird,” he said. “I 
am sorry I cannot hoist the sail and take you in 
with the small breeze that is rising. But I am with a 
friend.” 

Just then the fish gave a sudden lurch that pulled 
the old man down onto the bow and would have pulled 
him overboard if he had not braced himself and given 
some line. 

The bird had flown up when the line jerked and the 
old man had not even seen him go. He felt the line 


55 


The Old Man and the Sea 

carefully with his right hand and noticed his hand was 
bleeding. 

“Something hurt him then,” he said aloud and 
pulled back on the line to see if he could turn the fish. 
But when he was touching the breaking point he held 
steady and settled back against the strain of the line. 

“You're feeling it now, fish,” he said. “And so, God 
knows, am I.” 

He looked around for the bird now because he 
would have liked him for company. The bird was gone. 

You did not stay long, the man thought. But it is 
rougher where you are going until you make the shore. 
How did I let the fish cut me with that one quick pull 
he made? I must be getting very stupid. Or perhaps I 
was looking at the small bird and thinking of him. 
Now I will pay attention to my work and then I must 
eat the so that I will not have a failure of 

strength. 

“I wish the boy were here and that I had some salt,” 
he said aloiiT 

Shifting the weight of the line to his left shoulder 
and kneeling carefully he washed his hand in the 
ocean and held it there, submer ged^ for more than a 


56 


The Gld Man and the Sea 


minute watching the blood trail away and the steady 
movement of the water against his hand as the boat 
moved. 

“He has slowed much,” he said. 

The old man would have liked to keep his hand in 
the salt water longer but he was afraid of another sud- 
den lurch by the fish and he stood up and braced him- 
self and held his hand up against the sun. It was only a 
line burn that had cut his flesh. But it was in the work- 
ing part of his hand. He knew he would need his 
hands before this was over and he did not like to be cut 
before it started. 

“Now,” he said, when his hand had dried, “I must 
eat the small tuna. I can reach him with the gaff and 
eat him here in comfort.” 

He knelt down and found the tuna under the stern 
with the gaff and drew it toward him keeping it clear 
of the coiled lines. Holding the line with his left shoul- 
der again, and bracing on his left hand and arm, he 
took the tuna off the gaff hook and put the gaff back in 
place, fie put one knee on the fish and cut strips of 
dark red meat longitudinally from the back of the head 
to the tail. They were wedge-shaped strips and he cut 


57 


The Old Man and the Sea 


them from next to the baek bone down to the edge of 
the belly. When he had cut six strips he spread them 
out on the wood of the bow, wiped his knife on his 
trousers, and lifted the carcass of the bonito by the tail 
and dropped it overboard. 

“I don’t think I can eat an entire one,” he said and 
drew his knife across one of the strips. He could feel 
the steady hard pull of the line and his left hand was 
cramped. It drew up tight on the heavy cord and he 
looked at it in disgust. 

“What kind of a hand is that,” he said. “Cramp 
then if you want. Make yourself into a claw. It will do 
you no good.” 

Come on, he thought and looked down into the dark 
water at the slant of the line. Eat it now and it will 
strengthen the hand. It is not the hand’s fault and you 
have been many hours with the fish. But you can stay 
with him forever. Eat the bonito now. 

He picked up a piece and put it in his mouth and 
chewed it slowly. It was not unpleasant. 

Chew it well, he thought, and get all the juices. It 
would not be bad to eat with a little lime or with 
lemon or with salt. 

“How do you feel, hand?” he asked the cramped 

58 


The Old Man and the Sea 


hand that was almost as stiff as rigor mortis. “I’ll eat 
some more for you.” 

He ate the other part of the piece that he had cut in 
two. He chewed it carefully and then spat out the skin. 

“How does it go, hand? Or is it too early to know?” 

He took another full piece and chewed it. 

“It is a strong full-blooded fish,” he thought. “I was 
lucky to get him instead of dolphin. Dolphin is too 
svv^eet. This is hardly sweet at all and all the strength is 
still in it.” 

There is no sense in being anything but practical 
though, he thought. I wish I had some salt. And I do 
not know whether the sun will rot or dry what is left, 
so I had better eat it all although I am not hungry. 
The fish is calm and steady. I will eat it all and then I 
will be ready. 

“Be patient, hand,” he said. “I do this for you.” 

I wish I could feed the fish, he thought. He is my 
brother. But I must kill him and keep strong to do it. 
Slowly and conscientiously he ate all of the wedge- 
shaped strips of fish. 

He straightened up, wiping his hand on his trousers. 

“Now,” he said. “You can let the cord go, hand, and 
I will handle him with the right arm alone until you 


59 


The Old Man and the Sea 


stop that nonsense/’ He put his left foot on the heavy 
line that the left hand had held and lay back against 
the pull against his back. 

“God help me to have the cramp go,” he said. “Be- 
cause I do not know what the fish is going to do.” 

But he seems calm, he thought, and following his 
plan. But what is his plan, he thought. And what is 
mine? Mine I must improvise to his because of his 
great size. If he will jump I can kill him. But he stays 
down forever. Then I will stay down with him forever. 

He rubbed the cramped hand against his trousers ’ 
and tried to gentle the fingers. But it would not open. 
Maybe it will open with the sun, he thought. Maybe it 
will open when the strong raw tuna is digested. If I 
have to have it, I will open it, cost whatever it costs. 
But I do not want to open it now by force. Let it open 
by itself and come back of its own accord. After all I 
abused it much in the night when it was necessary to 
free and untie the various lines. 

He looked across the sea and knew how alone he 
was now. But he could see the prisms in the deep dark 
water and the line stretching ahead and the strange 
undulation of the calm. The clouds were building up 
now for the trade wind and he looked ahead and saw a 


6o 


The Gld Man and the Sea 

flight of wild ducks etching themselves against the sky 
over the water, then blurring, then etching again and 
he knew no man was ever alone on the sea. 

He thought of how some men feared being out of 
sight of land in a small boat and knew they were right 
in the months of sudden bad weather. But now they 
were in hurricane months and, when there are no hurri- 
canes, the weather of hurricane months is the best of 
all the year. 

If there is a hurricane you always see the signs of it 
in the sky for days ahead, if you are at sea. They do 
not see it ashore because they do not know what to 
look for, he thought. The land must make a difference 
too, in the shape of the clouds. But we have no hurri- 
cane coming now. 

He looked at the sky and saw the white cumulus 
built like friendly piles of ice cream and high above 
were the thin feathers of the cirrus against the high 
September sky. 

“Light hrisa/' he said. “Better weather for me than 
for you, fish.’' 

His left hand was still cramped, but he was unknot- 
ting it slowly. 

I hate a cramp, he thought. It is a treachery of one’s 


6i 


The Old Man and the Sea 

own body. It is humiliating before others to have a diar- 
rhoea from ptomaine poisoning or to vomit from it. But 
a cramp, he thought of it as a calamhre, humiliates one- 
self especially when one is alone. 

If the boy were here he could rub it for me and 
loosen it down from the forearm, he thought. But it will 
loosen up. 

Then, with his right hand he felt the difference in 
the pull of the line before he saw the slant change in 
the water. Then, as he leaned against the line and 
slapped his left hand hard and fast against his thigh he 
saw the line slanting slowly upward. 

“He’s coming up,” he said. “Come on hand. Please 
come on.” 

The line rose slowly and steadily and then the sur- 
face of the ocean bulged ahead of the boat and the fish 
came out. He came out unendingly and water poured 
from his sides. He was bright in the sun and his head 
and back were dark purple and in the sun the stripes 
on his sides showed wide and a light lavender. His 
sword was as long as a baseball bat and tapered like a 
rapier and he rose his full length from the water and 
then re-entered it, smoothly, like a diver and the old 


62 


The Old Man and the Sea 

man saw the great scythe-blade of his tail go under and 
the line commenced to race out. 

“He is two feet longer than the skiff/' the old man 
said. The line was going out fast but steadily and the 
fish was not panicked. The old man was trying with 
both hands to keep the line just inside of breaking 
strength. He knew that if he could not slow the fish 
' with a steady pressure the fish could take out all the 
I line and break it. 

He is a great fish and I must convince him, he 
. thought. I must never let him learn his strength nor 
j what he could do if he made his run. If I were him I 
I would put in everything now and go until something 
! broke. But, thank God, they are not as intelligent as 
' we who kill them; although they are more noble and 
more able. 

The old man had seen many great fish. He had seen 
many that weighed more than a thousand pounds and 
he had caught two of that size in his life, but never 
alone. Now alone, and out of sight of land, he w^as fast 
to the biggest fish that he had ever seen and bigger 
than he had ever heard of, and his left hand was still 
as tight as the gripped claws of an eagle. 


63 


The Old Man and the Sea 

It will uncramp though, he thought. Surely it will 
uncramp to help my right hand. There are three things 
that are brothers: the fish and my two hands. It must 
uncramp. It is unworthy of it to be cramped. The fish 
had slowed again and was going at his usual pace. 

I wonder why he jumped, the old man thought. He 
jumped almost as though to show me how big he was. I 
know now, anyway, he thought. I wish I could show 
him what sort of man I am. But then he would see the 
cramped hand. Let him think I am more man than I 
am and I will be so. I wish I was the fish, he thought, 
with everything he has against only my will and my 
intelligence. 

He settled comfortably against the wood and took 
his suffering as it came and the fish swam steadily and 
the boat moved slowly through the dark water. There 
was a small sea rising with the wind coming up from 
the east and at noon the old man’s left hand was un- 
cramped. 

“Bad news for you, fish,” he said and shifted the 
line over the sacks that covered his shoulders. 

He was comfortable but suffering, although he did 
not admit the suffering at all. 

“I am not religious,” he said. “But I will say ten Our 


64 


The Old Man and the Sea 

Fathers and ten Hail Marys that I should catch this 
fish, and I promise to make a pilgrimage to the Virgin 
of Cobre if I catch him. That is a promise.'^ 

He commenced to say his prayers mechanically. 
Sometimes he would be so tired that he could not re- 
member the prayer and then he would say them fast so 
that they would come automatically. Hail Marys are 
easier to say than Our Fathers, he thought. 

“Hail Mary full of Grace the Lord is with thee. 
Blessed art thou among women and blessed is the fruit 
of thy womb, Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray 
for us sinners now and at the hour of our death. 
Amen.” Then he added, “Blessed Virgin, pray for the 
death of this fish. Wonderful though he is.” 

With his prayers said, and feeling much better, but 
suffering exactly as much, and perhaps a little more, he 
leaned against the wood of the bow and began, mechan- 
ically, to work the fingers of his left hand. 

The sun was hot now although the breeze was rising 
gently. 

“I had better re-bait that little line out over the 
stern,” he said. “If the fish decides to stay another 
night I will need to eat again and the water is low in 
the bottle. I don’t think I can get anything but a dol- 


65 


The Old Man and the Sea 

phin here. But if I eat him fresh enough he won't be 
bad. I wish a flying fish would come on board tonight. 
But I have no light to attract them. A flying fish is 
excellent to eat raw and I would not have to cut him 
up. I must save all my strength now. Christ, I did not 
know he was so big. " 

“I'll kill him though," he said. “In all his greatness 
and his glory." 

Although it is unjust, he thought. But I will show 
him what a man can do and what a man endures. 

“I told the boy I was a strange old man," he said. 
“Now is when I must prove it." 

The thousand times that he had proved it meant 
nothing. Now he was proving it again. Each time was a 
new time and he never thought about the past when he 
was doing it. 

I wish he'd sleep and I could sleep and dream about 
the lions, he thought. Why are the lions the main 
thing that is left? Don't think, old man, he said to him- 
self. Rest gently now against the v>^ood and think of 
nothing. He is working. Work as little as you can. 

It was getting into the afternoon and the boat still 
moved slowly and steadily. But there was an added 
drag now from the easterly breeze and the old man 


66 


The Old Man and the Sea 


rode gently with the small sea and the hurt of the cord 
across his back came to him easily and smoothly. 

Once in the afternoon the line started to rise again. 
But the fish only continued to swim at a slightly higher 
level. The sun was on the old man’s left arm and shoul- 
der and on his back. So he knew the fish had turned 
east of north. 

Now that he had seen him once, he could picture 
the fish swimming in the water with his purple pecto- 
ral fins set wide as wings and the great erect tail slicing 
through the dark. I wonder how much he sees at that 
depth, the old man thought. His eye is huge and a 
horse, with much less eye, can see in the dark. Once I 
could see quite well in the dark. Not in the absolute 
dark. But almost as a cat sees. 

The sun and his steady movement of his fingers had 
uncramped his left hand now completely and he began 
to shift more of the strain to it and he shrugged the 
muscles of his back to shift the hurt of the cord a little. 

“If you’re not tired, fish,” he said aloud, “you must 
be very strange.” 

He felt very tired now and he knew the night would 
come soon and he tried to think of other things. He 
thought of the Big Leagues, to him they were the Gran 


67 


The Old Man and the Sea 

Ligas, and he knew that the Yankees of New York 
were playing the Tigres of Detroit. 

This is the second day now that I do not know the 
result of the juegos, he thought. But I must have 
confidence and I must be worthy of the great DiMag- 
gio who does all things perfectly even with the pain of 
the bone spur in his heel. What is a bone spur? he 
asked himself. Un esfuela de hueso. We do not have 
them. Can it be as painful as the spur of a fighting 
cock in one’s heel? I do not think I could endure that 
or the loss of the eye and of both eyes and continue to 
fight as the fighting cocks do. Man is not much beside 
the great birds and beasts. Still I v.'ould rather be that 
beast down there in the darkness of the sea. 

“Unless sharks come,” he said aloud. “If sharks 
come, God pity him and me.” 

Do you believe the great DiMaggio would stay with 
a fish as long as I will stay with this one? he thought, I 
am sure he would and more since he is young and 
strong. Also his father was a fisherman. But would the 
bone spur hurt him too much? 

“I do not know,” he said aloud. “I never had a bone 
spur.” 

As the sun set he remembered, to give himself more 


68 


The Old Man and the Sea 


confidence, the time in the tavern at Casablanca when 
he had played the hand game with the great negro 
from Cienfuegos who was the strongest man on the 
docks. They had gone one day and one night with 
their elbows on a chalk line on the table and their fore- 
arms straight up and their hands gripped tight. Each 
one was trying to force the other’s hand down onto the 
table. There was much betting and people went in and 
out of the room under the kerosene lights and he had 
looked at the arm and hand of the negro and at the 
negro’s face. They changed the referees every four 
hours after the first eight so that the referees could 
sleep. Blood came out from under the fingernails of 
both his and the negro’s hands and they looked each 
other in the eye and at their hands and forearms and 
the bettors went in and out of the room and sat on high 
chairs against the wall and watched. The walls were 
painted bright blue and were of wood and the lamps 
threw their shadows against them. The negro’s shadow 
was huge and it moved on the wall as the breeze moved 
the lamps. 

The odds would change back and forth all night and 
they fed the negro rum and lighted cigarettes for him. 
Then the negro, after the rum, would try for a tremen- 


69 


The Old Man and the Sea 


dous effort and once he had the old man, who was not 
an old man then but was Santiago El Qam'^mn^ nearly 
three inches off balance. But the old man had raised 
his hand up to dead even again. He was sure then that 
he had the negro, who was a fine man and a great ath- 
lete, beaten. And at daylight when the bettors were 
asking that it be called a draw and the referee was 
shaking his head, he had unleashed his effort and 
forced the hand of the negro down and down until it 
rested on the wood. The match had started on a Sun- 
day morning and ended on a Monday morning. Many 
of the bettors had asked for a draw because they had to 
go to work on the docks loading sacks of sugar or at the 
Havana Coal Company. Otherwise everyone would 
have wanted it to go to a finish. But he had finished it 
anyway and before anyone had to go to work. 

For a long time after that everyone had called him 
The Champion and there had been a return match in 
the spring. But not much money was bet and he had 
won it quite easily since he had broken the confidence 
of the negro from Cienfuegos in the first match. After 
that he had a few matches and then no more. He de- 
cided that he could beat anyone if he wanted to badly 
enough and he decided that it was bad for his right 


70 


The Old Man and the Sea 


hand for fishing. He had tried a few practice matches 
with his left hand. But his left hand had always been a 
traitor and would not do what he called on it to do and 
he did not trust it. 

The sun will bake it out well now, he thought. It 
should not cramp on me again unless it gets too cold in 
the night. I wonder what this night will bring. 

An airplane passed overhead on its course to JMiami 
and he watched its shadow scaring up the schools of 
flying fish. 

“With so much flying fish there should be dolphin,” 
he said, and leaned back on the line to see if it was 
possible to gain any on his fish. But he could not and it 
stayed at the hardness and water-drop shivering that 
preceded breaking. The boat moved ahead slowly and 
he watched the airplane until he could no longer see it. 

It must be very strange in an airplane, he thought. I 
wonder what the sea looks like from that height? They 
should be able to see the fish well if they do not fly too 
high. I would like to fly very slowly at two hundred 
fathoms high and see the fish from above. In the turtle 
boats I was in the cross-trees of the mast-head and even 
at that height I saw much. The dolphin look greener 
from there and you can see their stripes and their pur- 


71 


The Old Man and the Sea 


pie spots and you can see all of the school as they 
swim. Why is it that all the fast-moving fish of the 
dark current have purple backs and usually purple 
stripes or spots? The dolphin looks green of course be- 
cause he is really golden. But when he comes to feed, 
truly hungry, purple stripes show on his sides as on a 
marlin. Can it be anger, or the greater speed he makes 
that brings them out? 

Just before it was dark, as they passed a great island 
of Sargasso weed that heaved and swung in the light 
sea as though the ocean were making love with some- 
thing under a yellow blanket, his small line was taken 
by a dolphin. He saw it first when it jumped in the air, 
true gold in the last of the sun and bending and flap- 
ping wildly in the air. It jumped again and again in 
the acrobatics of its fear and he worked his way back to 
the stern and crouching and holding the big line with 
his right hand and arm, he pulled the dolphin in with 
his left hand, stepping on the gained line each time 
with his bare left foot. When the fish was at the stern, 
plunging and cutting from side to side in desperation, 
the old man leaned over the stern and lifted the 
burnished gold fish with its purple spots over the stern. 
Its jaws were working convulsively in quick bites against 


72 


The Old Man and the Sea 


the hook and it pounded the bottom of the skiif with 
its long fiat body, its tail and its head until he clubbed 
it across the shining golden head until it shivered and 
was still. 

The old man unhooked the fish, re-baited the line 
with another sardine and tossed it over. Then he 
worked his Vv^ay slowly back to the bow. He washed his 
left hand and wiped it on his trousers. Then he shifted 
the heavy line from his right hand to his left and 
washed his right hand in the sea while he watched the 
sun go into the ocean and the slant of the big cord. 

“He hasn’t changed at all,” he said. But watching 
the movement of the water against his hand he noted 
that it was perceptibly slower. 

“I’ll lash the two oars together across the stern and 
that will slow him in the night,” he said. “He’s good 
for the night and so am I.” 

It would be better to gut the dolphin a little later to 
save the blood in the meat, he thought. I can do that a 
little later and lash the cars to make a drag at the same 
time. I had better keep the fish quiet now and not dis- 
turb him too much at sunset. The setting of the sun is 
a difBcult time for all fish. 

He let his hand dry in the air then grasped the line 


73 


The Old Man and the Sea 


with it and eased himself as much as he could and al- 
lowed himself to be pulled forward against the wood so 
that the boat took the strain as much, or more, than he 

did. 

Fm learning how to do it, he thought. This part of 
it anyway. Then too, remember he hasn’t eaten since 
he took the bait and he is huge and needs much food. I 
have eaten the whole bonito. Tomorrow I will eat the 
dolphin. He called it dgrado. Perhaps I should eat 
some of it when I clean it. It will be harder to eat than 
the bonito. But, then, nothing is easy. 

“How do you feel, fish?” he asked aloud. “I feel 
good and my left hand is better and I have food for a 
night and a day. Pull the boat, fish.” 

He did not truly feel good because the pain from the 
cord across his back had almost passed pain and gone 
into a dullness that he mistrusted. But I have had 
worse things than that, he thought. My hand is only 
cut a little and the cramp is gone from the other. My 
legs are all right. Also now I have gained on him in the 
question of sustenance. 

It was dark now as it becomes dark quickly after the 
sun sets in September. He lay against the worn wood 
of the bow and rested all that he could. The first stars 


74 


The Old Man and the Sea 

were out. He did not know the name of Rigel but he 
saw it and knew soon they would all be out and he 
would have all his distant friends. 

“The fish is my friend too/’ he said aloud. “I have 
never seen or heard of such a fish. But I must kill him. 
I am glad we do not have to try to kill the stars.” 

Imagine if each day a man must try to kill the moon, 
he thought. The moon runs away. But imagine if a 
man each day should have to try to kill the sun? We 
were born lucky, he thought. 

Then he was sorry for the great fish that had noth- 
ing to eat and his determination to kill him never re- 
laxed in his sorrow for him. How many people will he 
feed, he thought. But are they worthy to eat him? No, 
of course not. There is no one worthy of eating him 
from the manner of his behaviour and his great 
dignity. 

I do not understand these things, he thought. But it 
is good that we do not have to try to kill the sun or the 
moon or the stars. It is enough to live on the sea and 
kill our true brothers. 

Now, he thought, I must think about the drag. It 
has its perils and its merits. I may lose so much line 
that I will lose him, if he makes his effort and the drag 


75 


The" Old Man and the Sea 

made by the oars is in place and the boat loses all her 
lightness. Her lightness prolongs both our suffering 
but it is my safety since he has great speed that he has 
never yet employed. No matter what passes I must gut 
the dolphin so he does not spoil and eat some of him to 
be strong. 

Now I will rest an hour more and feel that he is 
solid and steady before I move back to the stern to do 
the work and make the decision. In the meantime I 
can see how he acts and if he shows any changes. The 
oars are a good trick; but it has reached the time to 
play for safety. He is much fish still and I saw that the 
hook was in the corner of his mouth and he has kept 
his mouth tight shut. The punishment of the hook is 
nothing. The punishment of hunger, and that he is 
against something that he does not comprehend, is 
everything. Rest now, old man, and let him work until 
your next duty comes. 

He rested for what he believed to be two hours. The 
moon did not rise now until late and he had no way of 
judging the time. Nor was he really resting except com- 
paratively. He was still bearing the pull of the fish 
across his shoulders but he placed his left hand on the 


76 


The Old Man and the Sea 


gunwale of the bow and confided more and more of the 
resistance to the fish to the skiff itself. 

How simple it would be if I could make the line 
fast, he thought. But with one small lurch he could 
break it. I must cushion the pull of the line with my 
body and at all times be ready to give line with both 
hands. 

“But you have not slept yet, old man,’’ he said aloud. 
“It is half a day and a night and now another day and 
you have not slept. You must devise a way so that you 
sleep a little if he is quiet and steady. If you do not 
sleep you might become unclear in the head.” 

I’m clear enough in the head, he thought. Too clear. 
I am as clear as the stars that are my brothers. Still I 
must sleep. They sleep and the moon and the sun sleep 
and even the ocean sleeps sometimes on certain days 
when there is no current and a flat calm. 

But remember to sleep, he thought. Make yourself 
do it and devise some simple and sure way about the 
lines. Now go back and prepare the dolphin. It is too 
dangerous to rig the oars as a drag if you must sleep. 

I could go without sleeping, he told himself. But it 
would be too dangerous. 


77 


The Old Man and the Sea 

He started to work his way back to the stern on his 
hands and knees, being careful not to jerk against the 
fish. He may be half asleep himself, he thought. But I 
do not want him to rest. He must pull until he dies. 

Back in the stern he turned so that his left hand 
held the strain of the line across his shoulders and 
drew his knife from its sheath with his right hand. 
The stars were bright now and he saw the dolphin 
clearly and he pushed the blade of his knife into his 
head and drew him out from under the stern. He put 
one of his feet on the fish and slit him quickly from the 
vent up to the tip of his lower jaw. Then he put his 
knife down and gutted him with his right hand, scoop- 
ing him clean and pulling the gills clear. He felt the 
maw heavy and slippery in his hands and he slit it 
open. There were two flying fish inside. They were 
fresh and hard and he laid them side by side and 
dropped the guts and the gills over the stem. They 
sank leaving a trail of phosphorescence in the water. 
The dolphin was cold and a leprous gray-white now in 
the starlight and the old man skinned one side of him 
while he held his right foot on the fish’s head. Then he 
turned him over and skinned the other side and cut each 
side off from the head down to the tail. 


78 


The Old Man and the Sea 

He slid tlie carcass overboard and looked to see if 
there was any swirl in the water. But there was only 
the light of its slow descent. He turned then and 
placed the two flying fish inside the two fillets of fish 
and putting his knife back in its sheath, he worked his 
way slowly back to the bow. His back was bent with 
the weight of the line across it and he carried the fish 
in his right hand. 

Back in the bow he laid the two fillets of fish out on 
the wood with the flying fish beside them. After that 
he settled the line across his shoulders in a new place 
and held it again with his left hand resting on the gun- 
wale. Then he leaned over the side and washed the 
flying fish in the water, noting the speed of the water 
against his hand. His hand was phosphorescent from 
skinning the fish and he watched the flow of the water 
against it. The flow was less strong and as he rubbed 
the side of his hand against the planking of the skiff, 
particles of phosphorus floated off and drifted slowly 
astern. 

“He is tiring or he is resting,” the old man said. 
“Now let me get through the eating of this dolphin 
and get some rest and a little sleep.” 

Under the stars and with the night colder all the 


79 


The Old Man and the Sea 

time he ate half of one of the dolphin fillets and one of 
the flying fish, gutted and with its head cut off. 

“What an excellent fish dolphin is to eat cooked,” he 
said. “And what a miserable fish raw. I will never go in 
a boat again without salt or limes.” 

If I had brains I would have splashed water on the 
bow all day and drying, it would have made salt, he 
thought. But then I did not hook the dolphin until al- 
most sunset. Still it was a lack of preparation. But I 
have chewed it all well and I am not nauseated. 

The sky was clouding over to the east and one after 
another the stars he knew were gone. It looked now as 
though he were moving into a great canyon of clouds 
and the wind had dropped. 

“There will be bad weather in three or four days,” 
he said. “But not tonight and not tomorrow. Rig now to 
get some sleep, old man, while the fish is calm and 
steady.” 

He held the line tight in his right hand and then 
pushed his thigh against his right hand as he leaned all 
his weight against the wood of the bow. Then he 
passed the line a little lower on his shoulders and 
braced his left hand on it. 

My right hand can hold it as long as it is braced, he 


8o 


The Old Man and the Sea 


thought. If it relaxes in sleep my left hand will wake 
me as the line goes out. It is hard on the right hand. 
But he is used to punishment. Even if I sleep twenty 
minutes or a half an hour it is good. He lay forward 
cramping himself against the line with all of his body, 
putting all his weight onto his right hand, and he was 
asleep. 

He did not dream of the lions but instead of a vast 
school of porpoises that stretched for eight or ten miles 
and it was in the time of their mating and they would 
leap high into the air and return into the same hole 
they had made in the water when they leaped. 

Then he dreamed that he was in the village on his 
bed and there was a norther and he was very cold and 
his right arm was asleep because his head had rested 
on it instead of a pillow. 

After that he began to dream of the long yellow 
beach and he saw the first of the lions come down onto 
it in the early dark and then the other lions came and 
he rested his chin on the wood of the bows where the 
ship lay anchored with the evening off-shore breeze 
and he waited to see if there would be more lions and 
he was happy. 

The moon had been up for a long time but he slept 


8i 


The Old Man and the Sea 

on and the fish pulled on steadily and the boat moved 
into the tunnel of clouds. 

He woke with the jerk of his right fist coming up 
against his face and the line burning out through his 
right hand. He had no feeling of his left hand but he 
braked ail he could with his right and the line rushed 
out. Finally his left hand found the line and he leaned 
back against the line and now it burned his back and 
his left hand, and his left hand was taking all the 
strain and cutting badly. He looked back at the coils of 
line and they were feeding smoothly. Just then the fish 
jumped making a great bursting of the ocean and then 
a heavy fall. Then he jumped again and again and the 
boat was going fast although line was still racing out 
and the old man was raising the strain to breaking 
point and raising it to breaking point again and again. 
He had been pulled down tight onto the bow and his 
face was in the cut slice of dolphin and he could not 
move. 

This is what we waited for, he thought. So now let 
us take it. 

Make him pay for the line, he thought. Make him 
pay for it. 

He could not see the fish’s jumps but only heard the 


82 


The Old Man and the Sea 

breaking of the ocean and the heavy splash as he fell. 
The speed of the line was cutting his hands badly but 
he had always known this would happen and he tried 
to keep the cutting across the calloused parts and not 
let the line slip into the palm nor cut the fingers. 

If the boy was here he would wet the coils of line, 
he thought. Yes. If the boy were here. If the boy were 
here. 

The line went out and out and out but it was slow- 
ing now and he was making the fish earn each inch of 
it. Now he got his head up from the wood and out of 
the slice of fish tliat his cheek had crushed. Then he 
was on his knees and then he rose slowly to his feet. 
He was ceding line but more slowly all he time. He 
worked back to where he could feel with his foot the 
coils of line that he could not see. There was plenty of 
line still and now the fish had to pull the friction of all 
that new line through the water. 

Yes, he thought. And now he has jumped more than 
a dozen times and filled the sacks along his back with 
air and he cannot go down deep to die where I cannot 
bring him up. He will start circling soon and then I 
must work on him. I wonder what started him so sud- 
denly? Could it have been hunger that made him des- 


83 


The Old Man and the Sea 


perate, or was he frightened by something in the 
night? Maybe he suddenly felt fear. But he was such a 
calm, strong fish and he seemed so fearless and so 
confident. It is strange. 

“You better be fearless and confident yourself, old 
man,” he said. “You're holding him again but you can- 
not get line. But soon he has to circle.” 

The old man held him with his left hand and his 
shoulders now and stooped dov/n and scooped up water 
in his right hand to get the crushed dolphin flesh off of 
his face. He was afraid that it might nauseate him and 
he would vomit and lose his strength. When his face 
was cleaned he washed his right hand in the water 
over the side and then let it stay in the salt water v»?hile 
he watched the first light come before the sunrise. He’s 
headed almost east, he thought. That means he is tired 
and going with the current. Soon he will have to circle. 
Then our true work begins. 

After he judged that his right hand had been in the 
water long enough he took it out and looked at it. 

“It is not bad,” he said. “And pain does not matter 
to a man.” 

He took hold of the line carefully so that it did not 
fit into any of the fresh line cuts and shifted his weight 



The Old Man and the Sea 

so that he could put his left hand into the sea on the 
other side of the skiff. 

“You did not do so badly for something worthless/’ 
he said to his left hand. “But there was a moment 
when I could not find you.” 

Why was I not born with two good hands? he 
thought. Perhaps it was my fault in not training that 
one properly. But God knows he has had enough 
chances to learn. He did not do so badly in the night, 
though, and he has only cramped once. If he cramps 
again let the line cut him off. 

When he thought that he knew that he was not 
being clear-headed and he thought he should chew 
some more of the dolphin. But I can’t, he told himself. 
It is better to be light-headed than to lose your strength 
from nausea. And I know I cannot keep it if I eat it 
since my face was in it. I will keep it for an emergency 
until it goes bad. But it is too late to try for strength 
now through nourishment. You’re stupid, he told him- 
self. Eat the other flying fish. 

It was there, cleaned and ready, and he picked it up 
with his left hand and ate it chewing the hones care- 
fully and eating all of it down to the tail. 

It has more nourishment than almost any fish, he 


85 


The Old Man and the Sea 

thought. At least the kind of strength that I need. Now 
I have done what I can, he thought. Let him begin to 
circle and let the fight come. 

The sun was rising for the third time since he had 
put to sea when the fish started to circle. 

He could not see by the slant of the line that the 
fish was circling. It was too early for that. He just felt 
a faint slackening of the pressure of the line and be 
commenced to pull on it gently with his right hand. It 
tightened, as always, but just when he reached the 
point where it would break, line began to come in. He 
slipped his shoulders and head from under the line and 
began to puli in line steadily and gently. He used both 
of his hands in a swinging motion and tried to do the 
pulling as much as he could with his body and his legs. 
His old legs and shoulders pivoted with the swinging 
of the pulling. 

“It is a very big circle,” he said. “But he is circling.” 

Then the line would not come in any more and he 
held it until he saw the drops jumping from it in the 
sun. Then it started out and the old man knelt down 
and let it go grudgingly back into the dark water. 

“He is making the far part of his circle now,” he 
said. I must hold all I can, he thought. The strain will 


86 


The Old Man and the Sea 

shorten his circle each time. Perhaps in an hour I will 
see him. Now I must convince him and then I must 
kill him. 

But the fish kept on circling slowly and the old man 
was wet with sweat and tired deep into his bones two 
hours later. But the circles were much shorter now and 
from the way the line slanted he could tell the fish had 
risen steadily while he swam. 

For an hour the old man had been seeing black spots 
before his eyes and the sweat salted his eyes and salted 
the cut over his eye and on his forehead. He was not 
afraid of the black spots. They were normal at the ten- 
sion that he was pulling on the line. Twice, though, 
he had felt faint and dizzy and that had worried him. 

“I could not fail myself and die on a fish like this,'’ 
he said. “Now that I have him coming so beautifully, 
God help me endure. I'll say a hundred Our Fathers 
and a hundred Hail Marys. But I cannot say them 
now.” 

Consider them said, he thought. I’ll say them later. 

Just then he felt a sudden banging and jerking on 
the line he held with his two hands. It was sharp and 
hard-feeling and heavy. 

He is hitting the wire leader with his spear, he 


87 


The Old Man and the Sea 


thought. That v;as bound to come. He had to do that. 
It may make him jump though and I would rather he 
stayed circling now. The jumps were necessary for him 
to take air. But after that each one can widen the open- 
ing of the hook wound and he can throw the hook. 

“Don’t jump, fish,” he said. “Don’t jump.” 

The fish hit the wire se^/eral times more and each 
time he shook his head the old man gave up a little 
line. 

I must hold his pain where it is, he thought. Mine 
does not matter. I can control mine. But his pain could 
drive him mad. 

After a while the fish stopped heating at the wire 
and started circling slowly again. The old man was gain- 
ing line steadily now. But he felt faint again. He lifted 
soma sea water with his left hand and put it on his 
head. Then he put more on and rubbed the back of his 
neck. 

“I have no cramps,” he said. “He’ll be up soon and I 
can last. You have to last. Don’t even speak of it.” 

He kneeled against the bow and, for a moment, 
slipped the line over his back again. I’ll rest now while 
he goes out on the circle and then stand up and work 
on him when he comes in, he decided. 


88 


The Old Man and the Sea 

It was a great temptation to rest in the bow and 
let the fisb make one circle by himself without recov- 
ering any line. But when the strain showed the 
fish had turned to come toward the boat, the old 
man rose to his feet and started the pivoting and 
the weaving pulling that brought in all the line he 
gained. 

I’m tireder than I have ever been, he thought, and 
now the trade wind is rising. But that will be good to 
take him in with. I need that badly. 

“I’ll rest on the next turn as he goes out,” he said. “I 
feel much better. Then in two or three turns more I 
will have him.” 

His straw hat Vvas far on the back of his head and he 
sank down into the bow with the pull of the line as he 
felt the fish turn. 

You v/ork now, fish, he thought. I’ll take you at the 
turn. 

The sea had risen considerably. But it was a fair- 
weather breeze and he had to have it to get home. 

“I’ll just steer south and west,” he said. “A man is 
never lost at sea and it is a long island.” 

It was on the third turn that he saw the fish first. 

He saw him first as a dark shadow that took so long 


89 


The Old Man and the ^ Sea 

to pass under the boat that he could not believe its 
length, 

"No,” he said. "He canh be that big.” 

But he was that big and at the end of this circle 
he came to the surface only thirty yards away and 
the man saw his tail out of water. It was higher than 
a big scythe blade and a very pale lavender above 
the dark blue water. It raked back and as the fish 
swam just below the surface the old man could see his 
huge bulk and the purple stripes that banded him. 
His dorsal fin was down and his huge pectorals were 
spread wide. 

On this circle the old man could see the fish’s eye 
and the two gray sucking fish that swam around him. 
Sometimes they attached themselves to him. Some- 
times they darted off. Sometimes they would swim 
easily in his shadow. They were each over three feet 
long and when they swam fast they lashed their whole 
bodies like eels. 

The old man was sweating now hut from something 
else besides the sun. On each calm placid turn the fish 
made he was gaining line and he was sure that in two 
turns more he would have a chance to get the harpoon 
in. . 


90 


The Old Man and the Sea 


But I must get him close, close, close, he thought. I 
mustn’t try for the head. I must get the heart 

“Be calm and strong, old man,” he said. 

On the next circle the fish’s back was out but he was 
a little too far from the boat. On the next circle he was 
still too far away but he was higher out of water and 
the old man was sure that by gaining some more line 
he could have him alongside. 

He had rigged his harpoon long before and its coil of 
light rope was in a round basket and the end was made 
fast to the bitt in the bow. 

The fish was coming in on his circle now calm and 
beautiful looking and only his great tail moving. The 
old man pulled on him all that he could to bring him 
closer. For just a moment the fish turned a little on his 
side. Then he straightened himself and began another 
circle. 

“I moved him,” the old man said. “I moved him 
then.” 

He felt faint again now but he held on the great fish 
all the strain that he could. I moved him, he thought. 
Maybe this time I can get him over. Pull, hands, he 
thought. Hold up, legs. Last for me, head. Last for me. 
You never went. This time I’ll pull him over. 


91 


The Old Man and the Sea 

But when he put all of his effort on, starting it well 
out before the fish came alongside and pulling with all 
his strength, the fish pulled part way over and then 
righted himself and swam away. 

“Fish," the old man said. “Fish, you are going to 
have to die anyway. Do you have to kill me too?" 

That way nothing is accomplished, he thought. His 
mouth was too dry to speak but he could not reach for 
the water now. I must get him alongside this time, he 
thought. I am not good for many more turns. Yes you 
are, he told himself. You’re good for ever. 

On the next turn, he nearly had him. But again the 
fish righted himself and swam slowly away. 

You are killing me, fish, the old man thought. But 
you have a right to. Never have I seen a greater, or 
more beautiful, or a calmer or more noble thing than 
you, brother. Come on and kill me. I do not care who 
kills who. 

Now you are getting confused in the head, he 
thought. You must keep your head clear. Keep your 
head clear and know how to suffer like a man. Or a 
fish, he thought. ' 

“Clear up, head," he said in a voice he could hardly 
hear. “Clear up." 


92 


The Old Man and the Sea 

Twice more it was the same on the turns. 

I do not know, the old man thought. He had been 
on the point of feeling himself go each time. I do not 
know. But I will try it once more. 

He tried it once more and he felt himself going 
when he turned the fish. The fish righted himself and 
swam off again slowly with the great tail weaving in 
the air. 

I’ll try it again, the old man promised, although his 
hands were mushy now and he could only see well in 
flashes. 

He tried it again and it v.?as the same. So he thought, 
and he felt himself going before he started; I will try 
it once again. 

He took all his pain and what was left of his 
strength and his long gone pride and he put it against 
the fish’s agony and the fish came over onto his side 
and swam gently on his side, his bill almost touching 
the planking of the skiff and started to pass the boat, 
long, deep, wide, silver and barred with purple and in- 
terminable in the water. 

The old man dropped the line and put his foot on it 
and lifted the harpoon as high as he could and drove it 
down with all his strength, and more strength he had 


93 


The Old Man and the Sea 


just summoned, into the fish’s side just behind the 
great chest fin that rose high in the air to the altitude 
of the man’s chest. He felt the iron go in and he 
leaned on it and drove it further and then pushed all 
his weight after it. 

Then the fish came alive, with his death in him, and 
rose high out of the water showing all his great length 
and width and all his power and his beauty. He 
seemed to hang in the air above the old man in the 
skiff. Then he fell into the water with a crash that sent 
spray over the old man and over all of the skiff. 

The old man felt faint and sick and he could not see 
well. But he cleared the harpoon line and let it run 
slowly through his raw hands and, when he could see, 
he saw the fish was on his hack with his silver belly up. 
The shaft of the harpoon was projecting at an angle 
from the fish’s shoulder and the sea was discolouring 
with the red of the blood from his heart. First it was 
dark as a shoal in the, blue water that was more than a 
mile deep. Then it spread like a cloud. The fish was 
silvery and still and floated with the waves. 

The old man looked carefully in the glimpse of vi- 
sion that he had. Then he took two turns of the har- 


94 


The Old Man and the Sea 


poon line around tlie bitt in the bow and laid his head 
on his hands. 

“Keep my head clear/’ he said against the wood of 
the bow. “I am a tired old man. But I have killed this 
fish which is my brother and now I must do the slave 
work.” 

Now I must prepare the nooses and the rope to lash 
him alongside, he thought. Even if we were two and 
swamped her to load him and bailed her out, this skiff 
w’ould never hold him. I must prepare everything, then 
bring him in and lash him well and step the mast and 
set sail for home. 

He started to pull the fish in to have him alongside 
so that he could pass a line through his gills and out 
his miouth and make his head fast alongside the bow. I 
want to see him, he thought, and to touch and to feel 
him. He is my fortune, he thought. But that is not why 
I wish to feel him. I think I felt his heart, he thought. 
When I pushed on the harpoon shaft the second time. 
Bring him in now and make him fast and get the noose 
around his tail and another around his middle to bind 
him to the skiff. 

“Get to work, old man,” he said. He took a very 


95 


The Old Man and the Sea 

small drink of the water. “There is very much slave 
work to be done now that the fight is over.” 

He looked up at the sky and then out to his fish. He 
looked at the sun carefully. It is not much more than 
noon, he thought. And the trade wind is rising. The 
lines all mean nothing now. The boy and I will splice 
them when we are home. 

“Come on, fish,” he said. But the fish did not come. 
Instead he lay there wallowing now in the seas and the 
old man pulled the skiff up onto him. 

When he was even with him and had the fish's head 
against the bow he could not believe his size. But he 
untied the harpoon rope from the bitt, passed it 
through the fish’s gills and out his jaws, made a turn 
around his sword then passed the rope through the 
other gill, made another turn around the bill and 
knotted the double rope and made it fast to the bitt in 
the bow. He cut the rope then and went astern to 
noose the tail. The fish had turned silver from his origi- 
nal purple and silver, and the stripes showed the same 
pale violet colour as his tail. They were wider than a 
man's hand with his fingers spread and the fish's eye 
looked as detached as the mirrors in a periscope or as a 
saint in a procession. 


96 


The Old Man and' the Sea 

‘It was the only way to kill him,” the old man said. 
He was feeling better since the water and he knew he 
would not go away and his head was clear. He’s over 
fifteen hundred pounds the way he is, he thought. 
Maybe much more. If he dresses out two-thirds of that 
at thirty cents a pound? 

“I need a pencil for that,” he said. “My head is not 
that clear. But I think the great DiMaggio would be 
proud of me today. I had no bone spurs. But the hands 
and the back hurt truly.” I wonder what a bone spur 
is, he thought. Maybe we have them without knowing 
of it. 

He made the fish fast to bow and stern and to the 
middle thwart. He was so big it was like lashing a 
much bigger skiff alongside. He cut a piece of line and 
tied the fish’s lower jaw against his bill so his mouth 
would not open and they would sail as cleanly as possi- 
ble. Then he stepped the mast and, with the stick that 
was his gaff and with his boom rigged, the patched sail 
drew, the boat began to move, and half lying in the 
stern he sailed south-west. 

He did not need a compass to tell him where south- 
west was. He only needed the feel of the trade wind 
and the drawing of the sail. I better put a small line 


97 


The Old Man and the Sea 


out with a spoon on it and try and get something to eat 
and drink for the moisture. But he could not find a 
spoon and his sardines were rotten. So he hooked a 
patch of yellow Gulf weed with the gaff as they passed 
and shook it so that the small shrimps that were in it 
fell onto the planking of the skiff. There were more 
than a dozen of them and they jumped and kicked like 
sand fleas. The old man pinched their heads off with 
his thumb and forefinger and ate them chewing up the 
shells and the tails. They were very tiny but he knew 
they were nourishing and they tasted good. 

The old man still had two drinks of water in the 
bottle and he used half of one after he had eaten the 
shrimps. The skiflF was sailing well considering the 
handicaps and he steered with the tiller under his arm. 
He could see the fish and he had only to look at his 
hands and feel his back against the stem to know that 
this had truly happened and was not a dream. At one 
time when he was feeling so badly toward the end, he 
had thought perhaps it was a dream. Then when he 
had seen the fish come out of the water and hang mo- 
tionless in the sky before he fell, he was sure there was 
some great strangeness and he could not believe it. 


98 


The Old Man and the Sea 

Then he could not see well, although now he saw as 
well as ever. 

Now he knew there was the fish and his hands and 
back were no dream. The hands cure quickly, he 
thought. I bled them clean and the salt water will heal 
them. The dark water of the true gulf is the greatest 
healer that there is. All I must do is keep the head 
clear. The hands have done their work and we sail 
well. With his mouth shut and his tail straight up and 
down we sail like brothers. Then his head started to 
become a little unclear and he thought, is he bringing 
me in or am I bringing him in? If I were towing him 
behind there would be no question. Nor if the fish 
were in the skiff, with all dignity gone, there would be 
no question either. But they were sailing together 
lashed side by side and the old man thought, let him 
bring me in if it pleases him. I am only Letter than him 
through trickery and he meant me no harm. 

They sailed well and the old man soaked his hands 
in the salt water and tried to keep his head clear. 
There were high cumulus clouds and enough cirrus 
above them so that the old man knew the breeze would 
last all night. The old man looked at the fish constantly 


99 


The Old Man and the Sea 

to make sure it was true. It was an hour before the first 
shark hit him. 

The shark was not an accident. He had come up 
from deep down in the water as the dark cloud of blood 
had settled and dispersed in the mile deep sea. He had 
come up so fast and absolutely without caution that he 
broke the surface of the blue water and was in the sun. 
Then he fell back into the sea and picked up the scent 
and started swimming on the course the skiff and the 
fish had taken. 

Sometimes he lost the scent. But he would pick it up 
again, or have just a trace of it, and he swam fast and 
hard on the course. He was a very big Mako shark 
built to swim as fast as the fastest fish in the sea and 
everything about him was beautiful except his jaws. 
His back was as blue as a sword fish’s and his belly was 
silver and his hide was smooth and handsome. He was 
built as a sword fish except for his huge jaws which 
were tight shut now as he swam fast, just under the 
surface with his high dorsal fin knifing through the wa- 
ter without wavering. Inside the closed double lip of 
his jaws all of his eight rows of teeth were slanted in- 
wards. They were not the ordinary pyramid-shaped 
teeth of most sharks. They were shaped like a man’s 


loo 


The Old Man and the Sea 


fingers when they are crisped like claws . They were 
nearly as long as the fingers of the old man and they 
had razor-sharp cutting edges on both sides. This was a 
fish built to feed on all the fishes in the sea, that were 
so fast and strong and well armed that they had no 
other enemy. Now he speeded up as he smelled the 
fresher scent and his blue dorsal fin cut the water. 

When the old man saw him coming he knew that 
this was a shark that had no fear at all and would do 
exactly what he wished. He prepared the harpoon and 
made the rope fast while he watched the shark come 
on. The rope was short as it lacked what he had cut 
away to lash the fish. 

The old man’s head was clear and good now and he 
was full of resolution but he had little hope. It was too 
good to last, he thought. He took one look at the great 
fish as he watched the shark close in. It might as well 
have been a dream, he thought. I cannot keep him 
from hitting me but maybe I can get him. Dentuso, he 
thought. Bad luck to your mother. 

The shark closed fast astern and when he hit the 
fish the old man saw his mouth open and his strange 
eyes and the clicking chop of the teeth as he drove for- 
ward in the meat just above the tail. The shark’s head 

lOI 


The Old Man and tht Sea 


was out oi water and his back was coming out and the 
old man could hear the noise of skin and flesh ripping 
on the big fish when he rammed the harpoon down 
onto the shark’s head at a spot where the line between 
his eyes intersected with the line that ran straight back 
from his nose. There were no such lines. There was 
only the heavy sharp blue head and the big eyes and 
the clicking, thrusting all-swallowing jaws. But that 
was the location of the brain and the old man hit it. 
He hit it with his blood mushed hands driving a good 
harpoon with all his strength. He hit it without hope 
but with resolution and complete malignancy. 

The shark swung over and the old man saw his eye 
was not alive and then he swung over once again, wrap- 
ping himself in two loops of the rope. The old man 
knew that he was dead but. the shark would not accept 
it. Then, on his back, with his tail lashing and his jaws 
clicking, the shark plowed over the water as a speed- 
boat does. The water was white where his tail beat it 
and three-quarters of his body was clear above the wa- 
ter when the rope came taut, shivered, and then 
snapped. The shark lay quietly for a little while on the 
surface and the old man watched him. Then he went 
down very slowly. 


02 


The Old Man and the Sea 


“He took about forty pounds,” the old man said 
aloud. He took my harpoon too and all the rope, he 
thought, and now my fish bleeds again and there will 
be others. 

He did not like to look at the fish anymore since he 
had been mutilated. When the fish had been hit it was 
as though he himself were hit. 

But I killed the shark that hit my fish, he thought. 
And he was the biggest dentuso that I have ever seen. 
And God knows that I have seen big ones. 

It was too good to last, he thought. I wish it had 
been a dream now and that I had never hooked the fish 
and was alone in bed on the newspapers. 

“But man is not made for defeat,” he said. “A man 
can be destroyed but not defeated.” I am sorry that I 
killed the fish though, he thought. Now the bad time 
is coming and I do not even have the harpoon. The 
dentuso is cruel and able and strong and intelligent. 
But I was more intelligent than he was.' Perhaps not, 
he thought. Perhaps I was only better armed. 

“Don't think, old man,” he said aloud. “Sail on this 
course and take it when it comes.” 

But I must think, he thought. Because it is all I 
have left. That and baseball. I wonder how the great 

103 


The Old Man and the Sea 

DiMaggio would have liked the way I hit him in the 
brain? It was no great thing, he thought. Any man 
could do it. But do you think my hands v/ere as great a 
handicap as the bone spurs? I cannot know. I never 
had anything wrong with my heel except the time the 
sting ray stung it when I stepped on him when swim- 
ming and paralyzed the lower leg and made the un- 
bearable pain. 

“Think about something cheerful, old man,'’ he 
said. “Every minute now you are closer to home. You 
sail lighter for the loss of forty pounds.” 

He knew quite well the pattern of what could hap- 
pen when he reached the inner part of the current. But 
there was nothing to be done now. 

“Yes there is,” he said aloud. “I can lash my knife to 
the butt of one of the oars.” 

So he did that with the tiller under his arm and the 
sheet of the sail under his foot. 

“Now,” he said. “I am still an old man. But I am not 
unarmed.” 

The breeze was fresh now and he sailed on well. He 
watched only the forward part of the fish and some of 
his hope returned. 

It is silly not to hope, he thought. Besides I believe 
104 


The Old Man and the Sea 

it is a sin. Do not think about sin, be thought. There 
are enough problems now without sin. Also I have no 
understanding of it. 

I have no understanding of it and I am not sure that 
I believe in it. Perhaps it was a sin to kill the fish. I 
suppose it was even though I did it to keep me alive 
and feed many people. But then everything is a sin. Do 
not think about sin. Jt is much too late for that and 
there are people who are paid to do it. Let them think 
about it. You were born to be a fisherman as the fish 
was born to be a fish. San Pedro was a fisherman as 
was the father of the great DiMaggio. 

But he liked to think about all things that he was 
involved in and since there was nothing to read and he 
did not have a radio, he thought much and he kept on 
thinking about sin. You did not kill the fish only to 
keep alive and to sell for food, he thought. You killed 
him for pride and because you are a fisherman. You 
loved him when he was alive and you loved him after. 
If you love him, it is not a sin to kill him. Or is it 
more? 

“You think too much, old man,” he said aloud. 

But you enjoyed killing the dentuso, he thought. He 
lives on the live fish as you do. He is not a scavenger 


105 


The Old Man and the Sea 

nor just a moving appetite as some sharks are. He is 
beautiful and noble and knows no fear of anything. 

“I killed him in self-defense,” the old man said 
aloud. “And I killed him well.” 

Besides, he thought, everything kills everything else 
in some way. Fishing kills me exactly as it keeps me 
alive. The boy keeps me alive, he thought. I must not 
deceive myself too much. 

He leaned over the side and pulled loose a piece of 
the meat of the fish where the shark had cut him. He 
chewed it and noted its quality and its good taste. It was 
firm and juicy, like meat, but it was not red. There was 
no stringiness in it and he knew that it would bring 
the highest price in the market. But these was no way 
to keep its scent out of the water and the old man 
knew that a very had time was coming. 

The breeze was steady. It had backed a little further 
into the north-east and he knew that meant that it 
would not fall off. The old man looked ahead of him 
but he could see no sails nor could he see the hull nor 
the smoke of any ship. There were only the flying fish 
that went up from his bow sailing away to either side 
and the yellow patches of Gulf weed. He could not 
even see a bird. 

io6 


The Old Man and the Sea 

He had sailed for two hours, resting in the stern and 
sometimes chewing a bit of the meat from the marlin, 
trying to rest and to be strong, when he saw the first of 
the two sharks. 

“Ay," he said aloud. There is no translation for this 
word and perhaps it is just a noise such as a man might 
make, involuntarily, feeling the nail go through his 
hands and into the wood. 

“Galanos,” he said aloud. He had seen the second 
fin now coming up behind the first and had identified 
them as shovel-nosed sharks by the brown, triangular 
fin and the sweeping movements of the tail. They had 
the scent and were excited and in the stupidity of their 
great hunger they were losing and finding the scent in 
their excitement. But they were closing all the time. ^ 

The old man made the sheet fast and jammed the 
tiller. Then he took up the oar with the knife lashed to 
it. He lifted it as lightly as he could because his hands 
rebelled at the pain. Then he opened and closed them 
on it lightly to loosen them. He closed them firmly so 
they would take the pain now and would not flinch 
and watched the sharks come. He could see their wide, 
flattened, shovel-pointed heads novv^ and their white- 
tipped wide pectoral fins. They were hateful sharks, 


107 


The Old Man and the Sea 

bad smelling, scavengers as well as killers, and when 
they were hungry they would bite at an oar or the 
rudder of a boat. It was these sharks that would cut the 
turtles^ legs and flippers off when the turtles were 
asleep on the surface, and they would hit a man in the 
water, if they were hungry, even if the man had no 
smell of fish blood nor of fish slime on him. 

"Ay/' the old man said. "Galanos. Come on 
galanos.** 

They came. But they did not come as the Mako had 
come. One turned and went out of sight under the 
skiff and the old man could feel the skiff shake as he 
jerked and pulled on the fish. The other watched the 
old man with his slitted yellow eyes and then came in 
fast with his half circle of jaws wide to hit the fish 
where he had already been bitten. The line showed 
clearly on the top of his brown head and back where 
the brain joined the spinal cord and the old man drove 
the knife on the oar into the juncture, withdrewit/and 
drove it in again into the shark s yellow catdike eyes. 
The shark let go of the fish and slid down, /swallowing 
what he had taken as he died. 

The skiff was still shaking with the destruction the 
other shark was doing to the fish and the old man let 

io8 


The Old Man and the Sea 


go the sheet so that the skiff would swing broadside 
and bring the shark out from under. When he saw the 
shark he leaned over the side and punched at him. He 
hit only meat and the hide was set hard and he barely 
got the knife in. The blow hurt not only his hands but 
his shoulder too. But the shark came up fast with his 
head out and the old man hit him squarely in the cen- 
ter of his flat-topped head as his nose came out of water 
and lay against the fish. The old man withdrew the 
blade and punched the shark exactly in the same spot 
again. He still hung to the fish with his jaws hooked 
and the old man stabbed him in his left eye. The shark 
still hung there. 

“No?” the old man said and he drove the blade be- 
tween the vertebrae and the brain. It was an easy shot 
now and he felt the cartilage sever. The old man re- 
versed the oar and put the blade between the shark’s 
jaws to open them. He twisted the blade and as the 
shark slid loose he said, “Go on, galano. Slide down a 
mile deep. Go see your friend, or maybe its your 
mother.” 

The old man wiped the blade of his knife and laid 
down the oar. Then he found the sheet and the sail 
filled and he brought the skiff onto her course. 

109 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“They must have taken a quarter of him and of the 
best meat/' he said aloud. “I wish it were a dream and 
that I had never hooked him. I'm sorry about it, fish. It 
makes everything wrong." He stopped and he did not 
want to look at the fish now. Drained of blood and 
awash he looked the colour of the silver hacking of a 
mirror and his stripes still showed. 

“I shouldn't have gone out so far, fish," he said. . 
“Neither for you nor for me. I'm sorry, fish." 

Now, he said to himself. Look to the lashing on the 
knife and see if it has been cut. Then get your hand in 
order because there still is more to come. 

“I wish I had a stone for the knife," the old man 
said after he had checked the lashing on the oar butt. 
“I should have brought a stone." You should have 
brought many things, he thought. But you did not 
bring them, old man. Now is no time to think of what 
you do not have. Think of what you can do with what 
there is. 

“You give me much good counsel," he said aloud. 
“I'm tired of it." 

He held the tiller under his arm and soaked both his 
hands in the water as the skiff drove forward. 

“God knows how much that last one took," he said. 


I lO 


The Old Man and the Sea 


“But she’s much lighter now.” He did not want to 
think of the mutilated under-side of the fish. He knew 
that each of the jerking bumps of the shark had been 
meat tom away and that the fish now made a trail for 
all sharks as wide as a highway through the sea. 

He was a fish to keep a man all winter, he thought. 
Don’t think of that. Just rest and try to get your hands 
in shape to defend what is left of him. The blood smell 
from my hands means nothing now with all that scent 
in the water. Besides they do not bleed much. There is 
nothing cut that means anything. The bleeding may 
keep the left from cramping. 

What can I think of now? he thought. Nothing. I 
must think of nothing and wait for the next ones. I 
wish it had really been a dream, he thought. But who 
knows? It might have turned out well. 

The next shark that came was a single shovelnose. 
He came like a pig to the trough if a pig had a mouth 
so wide that you could put your head in it. The old 
man let him hit the fish and then drove the knife on 
the oar down into his brain. But the shark jerked back- 
wards as he rolled and the knife blade snapped. 

The old man settled himself to steer. He did not 
even watch the big shark sinking slowly in the water, 

1 1 1 


The Old Man and the Sea 

showing first life-size, then small, then tiny. That al- 
ways fascinated the old man. But he did not even 
watch it now. 

“I have the gaff now,” he said. “But it will do no 
good. I have the two oars and the tiller and the short 
club.” 

Now they have beaten me, he thought. I am too old 
to club sharks to death. But I will try it as long as I 
have the oars and the short club and the tiller. 

He put his hands in the water again to soak them. It 
was getting late in the afternoon and he saw nothing 
but the sea and the sky. There was more wind in the 
sky than there had been, and soon he hoped that he 
would see land. 

“You’re tired, old man,” he said. “You’re tired in- 
side.” 

The sharks did not hit him again until just before 
sunset. 

Tbe old man saw the brown fins coming along the 
wide trail the fish must make in the water. They 
were not even quartering on the scent. They were 
headed straight for the skiff swimming side by side. 

He jammed the tiller, made the sheet fast and 
reached under the stern for the club. It was an oar han- 


II2 


The Old Man and the Sea 


die from a broken oar sawed olf to about two and a half 
feet in length. He could only use it effectively with 
one band because of the grip of the handle and he took 
good hold of it with his right hand, flexing his hand on 
it, as he watched the sharks come. They were both ga- 
lanos. 

1 must let the first one get a good hold and hit him 
on the point of the nose or straight across the top of the 
head, he thought. 

The two sharks closed together and as he saw the 
one nearest him open his jaws and sink them into 
the silver side of the fish, he raised the club high 
and brought it down heavy and slamming onto the 
top of the shark’s broad head. He felt the rubbery 
solidity as the club came down. But he felt the rigid- 
ity of bone too and he struck the shark once more 
hard across the point of the nose as he slid down from 
the fish. 

The other shark had been in and out and now came 
in again with his jaws wide. The old man could see 
pieces of the meat of the fish spilling white from the 
corner of his jaws as he bumped the fish and closed his 
jaws. He swung at him and hit only the head and the 
shark looked at him and wrenched the meat loose. The 


The Old Man and the Sea 

old man swung the club down on him again as he 
slipped away to swallow and hit only the heavy solid 
rubberiness. 

“Come on, galano" the old man said. “Come in 
again.” 

The shark came in a rush and the old man hit him 
as he shut his jaws. He hit him solidly and from as 
high up as he could raise the club. This time he felt 
the bone at the base of the brain and he hit him again 
in the same place while the shark tore the meat loose 
sluggishly and slid down from the fish. 

The old man watched for him to come again but 
neither shark showed. Then he saw one on the surface 
swimming in circles. He did not see the fin of the 
other. 

1 could not expect to kill them, he thought. I could 
have in my time. But I have hurt them both badly and 
neither one can feel very good. If I could have used a 
bat with two hands I could have killed the first one 
surely. Even now, he thought. 

He did not want to look at the fish. He knew that 
half of him had been destroyed. The sun had gone 
down while he had been in the fight with the sharks. 

“It will be dark soon,” he said. “Then I should see 

114 


The Old Man and the Sea 


the glow of Havana.. If I am too far to the eastward I 
will see the lights of one of the new beaches.” 

I cannot be too far out now, he thought. I hope no 
one has been too worried. There is only the boy to 
worry, of course. But I am sure he would have 
confidence. Many of the older fishermen will worry. 
Many others too, he thought. I live in a good town. 

He could not talk to the fish anymore because the 
fish had been ruined too badly. Then something came 
into his head. 

“Half fish,” he said. “Fish that you were. I am sorry 
that I went too far out. I ruined us both. But we have 
killed many sharks, you and I, and ruined many others. 
How many did you ever kill, old fish? You do not have 
that spear on your head for nothing.” 

He liked to think of the fish and what he could do to 
a shark if he were swimming free. I should have 
chopped the bill off to fight them with, he thought. 
But there was no hatchet and then there was no knife. 

But if I had, and could have lashed it to an oar butt, 
what a weapon. Then we might have fought themAo- 
gether. What will you do now if they come in the 
night? What can you do? 

“Fight them,” he said. “Fll fight them until I die.” 


5 


The Old Man and the Sea 


But in tKe dark now and no glow showing and no 
lights and only the wind and the steady pull of the sail 
he felt that perhaps he was already dead. He put his 
two hands together and felt the palms. They were not 
dead and he could bring the pain of life by simply 
opening and closing them. He leaned his back against 
the stern and knew he was not dead. His shoulders 
told him. 

I have all those prayers I promised if I caught the 
fish, he thought. But I am too tired to say them now. I 
better get the sack and put it over my shoulders. 

He lay in the stern and steered and watched for the 
glow to come in the sky. I have half of him, he 
thought. Maybe I’ll have the luck to bring the forward 
half in. I should have some luck. No, he said. You vio- 
lated your luck when you went too far outside. 

“Don’t be silly,” he said aloud. “And keep awake 
and steer. You may have much luck yet. 

“I’d like to buy some if there’s any place they sell 
it,” he said. 

What could I buy it with? he asked himself. Could I 
buy it with a lost harpoon and a broken knife and two 
bad hands? 

“You might,” he said. “You tried to buy it with 
1 16 


The Old Man and the Sea 

eighty-four days at sea. They nearly sold it to you too.” 

I must not think nonsense, he thought. Luck is a 
thing that comes in many forms and who can recognize 
her? I would take some though in any form and pay 
what they asked. I wish I could see the glow from the 
lights, he thought. I wish too many things. But that is 
the thing I wish for now. He tried to settle more com- 
fortably to steer and from his pain he knew he was not 
dead. 

He saw the reflected glare of the lights of the city at 
what must have been around ten o’clock at night. They 
were only perceptible at first as the light is in the sky 
before the moon rises. Then they were steady to see 
across the ocean which was rough now with the increas- 
ing breeze. He steered inside of the glow and he 
thought that now, soon, he must hit the edge of the 
stream. 

Now it is over, he thought. They will probably hit 
me again. But what can a man do against them in the 
dark without a weapon? 

He was stiff and sore now and his wounds and all of 
the strained parts of his body hurt with the cold of the 
night. I hope I do not have to fight again, he thought. I 
hope so much I do not have to fight again. 


117 


The Old 'Man and the Sea 

But by midnight he fought and this time he knew 
the fight was useless. They came in a pack and he 
could only see the lines in the water that their fins 
made and their phosphorescence as they threw them- 
selves on the fish. He clubbed at heads and heard the 
jaws chop and the shaking of the skiff as they took 
hold below. He clubbed desperately at what he could 
only feel and hear and he felt something seize the club 
and it was gone. 

He jerked the tiller free from the rudder and beat 
and chopped with it, holding it in both hands and driv- 
ing it down again and again. But they were up to the 
bow now and driving in one after the other and to- 
gether, tearing off the pieces of meat that showed glow- 
ing below the sea as they turned to come once more. 

One came, finally, against the head itself and he 
knew that it was over. He swung the tiller across the 
shark’s head where the jaws were caught in the heavi- 
ness of the fish’s head which would not tear. He swung 
it once and twice and again. He heard the tiller break 
and he lunged at the shark with the splintered butt. 
He felt it go in and knowing it was sharp he drove it in 
again. The shark let go and rolled away. That was the 


ii8 


The Old Man and the Sea 


last shark of the pack that came. There was nothing 
more for them to eat. 

The old man could hardly breathe now and he felt a 
strange taste in his mouth. It was coppery and sweet 
and he was afraid of it for a moment. But there was not 
much of it. 

He spat into the ocean and said, “Eat that, galanos. 
And make a dream you’ve killed a man.” 

He knew he was beaten now finally and without 
remedy and he went back to the stern and found the 
jagged end of the tiller would fit in the slot of the 
rudder well enough for him to steer. He settled the 
sack around his shoulders and put the skiff on her 
course. He sailed lightly now and he had no thoughts 
nor any feelings of any kind. He was past everything 
now and he sailed the skiff to make his home port as 
well and as intelligently as he could. In the night 
sharks hit the carcass as someone might pick up 
crumbs from the table. The old man paid no attention 
to them and did not pay any attention to anything ex- 
cept steering. He only noticed how lightly and how 
well the skiff sailed now there was no great weight be- 
side her. 

119 


The Old Man and the Sea 


She’s good, he thought. She is sound and not 
harmed in any way except ror the tiller. That is easily 
replaced. 

He could feel he was inside the current now and he 
could see the lights of the beach colonies along the 
shore. He knew where he was now and it was nothing 
to get home. 

The wind is our friend, anyway, he thought. Then 
he added, sometimes. And the great sea with our 
friends and our enemies. And bed, he thought. Bed is 
my friend. Just bed, he thought. Bed will be a great 
thing. It is easy when you are beaten, he thought. I 
never knew how easy it was. And what beat you, he 
thought. 

“Nothing,” he said aloud. “I went out too far.” 

When he sailed into the little harbour the lights of 
the Terrace v;ere out and he knew everyone was in 
bed. The ‘breeze^iad risen steadily and was blowing 
strongly now. It was quiet in the harbour though and 
he sailed up onto the little patch of shingle below the 
rocks. There was no one to help him so he pulled the 
boat up as far as he could. Then he stepped out and 
made her fast to a rock. 


20 


The Old Man and the Sea 


He unstepped the mast and furled the sail and tied 
it. Then he shouldered the mast and started to climb. 
It was then he knew the depth of his tiredness. He 
stopped for a moment and looked back and saw in the 
reflection from the street light the great tail of the fish 
standing up well behind the skiff’s stern. He saw the 
white naked line of his backbone and the dark mass of 
the head with the projecting bill and all the nakedness 
between. 

He started to climb again and at the top he fell and 
lay for some time with the mast across his shoulder. He 
tried to get up. But it was too difficult and he sat there 
with the mast on his shoulder and looked at the road. 
A cat passed on the far side going about its business 
and the old man watched it. Then he just watched the 
road. 

Finally he put the mast down and stood up. He 
picked the mast up and put it on his shoulder and 
started up the road. He had to sit down five times be- 
fore he reached his shack. 

Inside the shack he leaned the mast against the wall. 
In the dark he found a water bottle and took a drink. 
Then he lay down on the bed. He pulled the blanket 


21 


The Old Man and the Sea 

over his shoulders and then over his back and legs and 
he slept face down on the newspapers with his arms 
out straight and the palms of his hands up. 

He was asleep when the boy looked in the door in 
the morning. It was blowing so hard that the drifting- 
boats would not be going out and the boy had slept late 
and then come to the old man s shack as he had come 
each morning. The boy saw that the old man was 
breathing and then he saw the old man’s hands and he 
started to cry. He went out very quietly to go to bring 
some coffee and all the way down the road he was 
crying. 

Many fishermen were around the skiff looking at 
what was lashed beside it and one was in the water, his 
trousers rolled up, measuring the skeleton with a 
length of line. 

The boy did not go down. He had been there before 
and one of the fishermen was looking after the skiff for 
him. 

‘‘How is he?” one of the fishermen shouted. 

“Sleeping,” the boy called. He did not care that 
they saw him crying. “Let no one disturb him.” 

“He was eighteen feet from nose to tail,” the fisher- 
man who was measuring him called. 


122 


The Old Man and the Sea 


“I believe it," the boy said. 

He went into the Terrace and asked for a can of 
coffee. 

“Hot and with plenty of milk and sugar in it." 

“Anything more?" 

“No. Afterwards I will see what he can eat." 

“What a fish it was," the proprietor said. “There has 
never been such a fish. Those were two fine fish you 
took yesterday too." 

“Damn my fish," the boy said and he started to cry 
again. 

“Do you want a drink of any kind?" the proprietor 
asked. 

“No," the boy said. “Tell them not to bother Santi- 
ago. ril be back." 

“Tell him how sorry I am." 

“Thanks," the boy said. 

The boy carried the hot can of coffee up to the 
old man’s shack and sat by him until he woke. 
Once it looked as though he were waking. But he 
had gone back into heavy sleep and the boy had 
gone across the road to borrovtZ some wood to heat the 
coffee. 

Finally the old man woke. 


123 


The Old Man and the. Sea 

“Don't sit up," the boy said. “Drink this." He 
poured some of the coffee in a glass. 

The old man took it and drank it. 

“They beat me, Manolin," he said. “They truly beat 
me." 

“He didn’t beat you. Not the fish." 

“No. Truly. It was afterwards." 

“Pedrico is looking after the skiff and the gear. 
What do you want done with the head?" 

“Let Pedrico chop it up to use in fish traps." 

“And the spear?" 

“You keep it if you want it." 

“I want it," the boy said. “Now we must make our 
plans about the other things." 

“Did they search for me?" 

“Of course. With coast guard and with planes." 

“The ocean is very big and a skiff is small and hard 
to see," the old man said. He noticed how pleasant it 
was to have someone to talk to instead of speaking only 
to himself and to the sea. “I missed you," he said. 
“What did you catch?" 

“One the first day. One the second and two the 
third." 


124 


The Old Man and the Sea 

‘Very good." 

“Now we fish together again." 

“No. I am not lucky. I am not lucky anymore." 

“The hell with luck," the boy said. “I’ll bring the 
luck with me." 

“What will your family say?" 

“I do not care. I caught two yesterday. But we will 
fish together now for I still have much to learn." 

“We must get a good killing lance and always have 
it on board. You can make the blade from a spring leaf 
from an old Ford. We can grind it in Guanabacoa. It 
should be sharp and not tempered so it will break. My 
knife broke." 

“I’ll get another knife and have the spring ground. 
How many days of heavy hrisa have we?" 

“Maybe three. Maybe more." 

“I will have everything in order," the boy said. “You 
get your hands well old man." 

“I know how to care for them. In the night I spat 
something strange and felt something in my chest was 
broken.” 

“Get that well too," the boy said. “Lie down, old 
man, and I will bring you your clean shirt. And some- 
thing to eat.” 


125 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“Bring any of the papers of the time that I was 
gone,” the old man said. 

“You must get well fast for there is much that I can 
learn and you can teach me everything. How much did 
you suffer?” 

“Plenty,” the old man said. 

“Fll bring the food and the papers,” the boy said. 
“Rest well, old man. I will bring stuff from the drug- 
store for your hands.” 

“Don’t forget to tell Pedrico the head is his.” 

“No. I will remember.” 

As the boy went out the door and down the worn 
coral rock road he was crying again. 

That afternoon there was a party of tourists at the 
Terrace and looking down in the water among the 
empty beer cans and dead barracudas a woman saw a 
great long white spine with a huge tail at the end that 
lifted and swung with the tide while the east wind 
blew a heavy steady sea outside the entrance to the har- 
bour. 

“What’s that?” she asked a waiter and pointed to the 
long backbone of the great fish that was now just gar- 
bage waiting to go out with the tide. 


126 


DC 


The Old Man and the Sea 

“Tiburon," the waiter said. “Eshark." He was mean- 
ing to explain what had happened. 

“I didn't know sharks had such handsome, beauti- 
fully formed tails." 

“I didn't either," her male companion said. 

Up the road, in his shack, the old man was sleeping 
again. He was still sleeping on his face and the boy 
was sitting by him watching him. The old man was 
dreaming about the lions. 


127 


                                PART ONE
                         Red and Black Laughter


    _The only source of the true Ridiculous (as it appears to me) is
    affectation._

                                                      HENRY FIELDING




                              CHAPTER ONE

Yogi Johnson stood looking out of the window of a big pump-factory in
Michigan. Spring would soon be here. Could it be that what this writing
fellow Hutchinson had said, “If winter comes can spring be far behind?”
would be true again this year? Yogi Johnson wondered. Near Yogi at the
next window but one stood Scripps O’Neil, a tall, lean man with a tall,
lean face. Both stood and looked out at the empty yard of the
pump-factory. Snow covered the crated pumps that would soon be shipped
away. Once the spring should come and the snow melt, workmen from the
factory would break out the pumps from piles where they were snowed in
and haul them down to the G. R. & I. station, where they would be loaded
on flat-cars and shipped away. Yogi Johnson looked out of the window at
the snowed-in pumps, and his breath made little fairy tracings on the
cold windowpane. Yogi Johnson thought of Paris. Perhaps it was the
little fairy tracings that reminded him of the gay city where he had
once spent two weeks. Two weeks that were to have been the happiest
weeks of his life. That was all behind him now. That and everything
else.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Scripps O’Neil had two wives. As he looked out of the window, standing
tall and lean and resilient with his own tenuous hardness, he thought of
both of them. One lived in Mancelona and the other lived in Petoskey. He
had not seen the wife who lived in Mancelona since last spring. He
looked out at the snow-covered pump-yards and thought what spring would
mean. With his wife in Mancelona Scripps often got drunk. When he was
drunk he and his wife were happy. They would go down together to the
railway station and walk out along the tracks, and then sit together and
drink and watch the trains go by. They would sit under a pine-tree on a
little hill that overlooked the railway and drink. Sometimes they drank
all night. Sometimes they drank for a week at a time. It did them good.
It made Scripps strong.

Scripps had a daughter whom he playfully called Lousy O’Neil. Her real
name was Lucy O’Neil. One night, after Scripps and his old woman had
been out drinking on the railroad line for three or four days, he lost
his wife. He didn’t know where she was. When he came to himself
everything was dark. He walked along the railroad track toward town. The
ties were stiff and hard under his feet. He tried walking on the rails.
He couldn’t do it. He had the dope on that all right. He went back to
walking along the ties. It was a long way into town. Finally he came to
where he could see the lights of the switch-yard. He cut away from the
tracks and passed the Mancelona High School. It was a yellow-brick
building. There was nothing rococo about it, like the buildings he had
seen in Paris. No, he had never been in Paris. That was not he. That was
his friend Yogi Johnson.

Yogi Johnson looked out of the window. Soon it would be time to shut the
pump-factory for the night. He opened the window carefully, just a
crack. Just a crack, but that was enough. Outside in the yard the snow
had begun to melt. A warm breeze was blowing. A chinook wind the pump
fellows called it. The warm chinook wind came in through the window into
the pump-factory. All the workmen laid down their tools. Many of them
were Indians.

The foreman was a short, iron-jawed man. He had once made a trip as far
as Duluth. Duluth was far across the blue waters of the lake in the
hills of Minnesota. A wonderful thing had happened to him there.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The foreman put his finger in his mouth to moisten it and held it up in
the air. He felt the warm breeze on his finger. He shook his head
ruefully and smiled at the men, a little grimly perhaps.

“Well, it’s a regular chinook, boys,” he said.

Silently for the most part, the workmen hung up their tools. The
half-completed pumps were put away in their racks. The workmen filed,
some of them talking, others silent, a few muttering, to the washroom to
wash up.

Outside through the window came the sound of an Indian war-whoop.


                              CHAPTER TWO

Scripps O’Neil stood outside the Mancelona High School looking up at the
lighted windows. It was dark and the snow was falling. It had been
falling ever since Scripps could remember. A passer-by stopped and
stared at Scripps. After all, what was this man to him? He went on.

Scripps stood in the snow and stared up at the lighted windows of the
High School. Inside there people were learning things. Far into the
night they worked, the boys vying with the girls in their search for
knowledge, this urge for the learning of things that was sweeping
America. His girl, little Lousy, a girl that had cost him a cool
seventy-five dollars in doctors’ bills, was in there learning. Scripps
was proud. It was too late for him to learn, but there, day after day
and night after night, Lousy was learning. She had the stuff in her,
that girl.

Scripps went on up to his house. It was not a big house, but it wasn’t
size that mattered to Scripps’s old woman.

“Scripps,” she often said when they were drinking together, “I don’t
want a palace. All I want is a place to keep the wind out.” Scripps had
taken her at her word. Now, as he walked in the late evening through the
snow and saw the lights of his own home, he felt glad that he had taken
her at her word. It was better this way than if he were coming home to a
palace. He, Scripps, was not the sort of chap that wanted a palace.

He opened the door of his house and went in. Something kept going
through his head. He tried to get it out, but it was no good. What was
it that poet chap his friend Harry Parker had met once in Detroit had
written? Harry used to recite it: “Through pleasures and palaces though
I may roam. When you something something something there’s no place like
home.” He could not remember the words. Not all of them. He had written
a simple tune to it and taught Lucy to sing it. That was when they first
were married. Scripps might have been a composer, one of these chaps
that write the stuff the Chicago Symphony Orchestra plays, if he had had
a chance to go on. He would get Lucy to sing that song tonight. He would
never drink again. Drinking robbed him of his ear for music. Times when
he was drunk the sound of the whistles of the trains at night pulling up
the Boyne Falls grade seemed more lovely than anything this chap
Stravinsky had ever written. Drinking had done that. It was wrong. He
would get away to Paris. Like this chap Albert Spalding that played the
violin.

Scripps opened the door. He went in. “Lucy,” he called, “it is I,
Scripps.” He would never drink again. No more nights out on the
railroad. Perhaps Lucy needed a new fur coat. Perhaps, after all, she
had wanted a palace instead of this place. You never knew how you were
treating a woman. Perhaps, after all, this place was not keeping out the
wind. Fantastic. He lit a match. “Lucy!” he called, and there was a note
of dumb terror in his mouth. His friend Walt Simmons had heard just such
a cry from a stallion that had once been run over by a passing autobus
in the Place Vendôme in Paris. In Paris there were no geldings. All the
horses were stallions. They did not breed mares. Not since the war. The
war changed all that.

“Lucy!” he called, and again “Lucy!” There was no answer. The house was
empty. Through the snow-filled air, as he stood there alone in his tall
leanness, in his own deserted house, there came to Scripps’s ears the
distant sound of an Indian war-whoop.


                             CHAPTER THREE

Scripps left Mancelona. He was through with that place. What had a town
like that to give him? There was nothing to it. You worked all your life
and then a thing like that happened. The savings of years wiped out.
Everything gone. He started to Chicago to get a job. Chicago was the
place. Look at its geographical situation, right at the end of Lake
Michigan. Chicago would do big things. Any fool could see that. He would
buy land in what is now the Loop, the big shopping and manufacturing
district. He would buy the land at a low price and then hang onto it.
Let them try and get it away from him. He knew a thing or two now.

Alone, bareheaded, the snow blowing in his hair, he walked down the G.
R. & I. railway tracks. It was the coldest night he had ever known. He
picked up a dead bird that had frozen and fallen onto the railroad
tracks and put it inside his shirt to warm it. The bird nestled close to
his warm body and pecked at his chest gratefully.

“Poor little chap,” Scripps said. “You feel the cold too.”

Tears came into his eyes.

“Drat that wind,” Scripps said and once again faced into the blowing
snow. The wind was blowing straight down from Lake Superior. The
telegraph wires above Scripps’s head sang in the wind. Through the dark,
Scripps saw a great yellow eye coming toward him. The giant locomotive
came nearer through the snow-storm. Scripps stepped to one side of the
track to let it go by. What is it that old writing fellow Shakespeare
says: “Might makes right”? Scripps thought of that quotation as the
train went past him in the snowing darkness. First the engine passed. He
saw the fireman bending to fling great shovelfuls of coal into the open
furnace door. The engineer wore goggles. His face was lit up by the
light from the open door of the engine. He was the engineer. It was he
who had his hand on the throttle. Scripps thought of the Chicago
anarchists who, when they were hanged, said: “Though you throttle us
today, still you cannot something something our souls.” There was a
monument where they were buried in Waldheim Cemetery, right beside the
Forest Park Amusement Park, in Chicago. His father used to take Scripps
out there on Sundays. The monument was all black and there was a black
angel. That was when Scripps had been a little boy. He used often to ask
his father: “Father, why if we come to look at the anarchists on Sunday
why can’t we ride on the shoot the chutes?” He had never been satisfied
with his father’s answer. He had been a little boy in knee pants then.
His father had been a great composer. His mother was an Italian woman
from the north of Italy. They are strange people, these north Italians.

Scripps stood beside the track, and the long black segments of the train
clicked by him in the snow. All the cars were Pullmans. The blinds were
down. Light came in thin slits from the bottom of the dark windows as
the cars went by. The train did not roar by as it might have if it had
been going in the other direction, because it was climbing the Boyne
Falls grade. It went slower than if it had been going down. Still it
went too fast for Scripps to hitch on. He thought how he had been an
expert at hitching on grocery wagons when he was a young boy in knee
pants.

The long black train of Pullman cars passed Scripps as he stood beside
the tracks. Who were in those cars? Were they Americans, piling up money
while they slept? Were they mothers? Were they fathers? Were there
lovers among them? Or were they Europeans, members of a worn-out
civilization world-weary from the war? Scripps wondered.

The last car passed him and the train went on up the track. Scripps
watched the red light at its stern disappearing into the blackness
through which the snowflakes now came softly. The bird fluttered inside
his shirt. Scripps started along the ties. He wanted to get to Chicago
that night, if possible, to start work in the morning. The bird
fluttered again. It was not so feeble now. Scripps put his hand on it to
still its little bird flutterings. The bird was calmed. Scripps strode
on up the track.

After all, he did not need to go as far as Chicago. There were other
places. What if that critic fellow Henry Mencken had called Chicago the
Literary Capital of America? There was Grand Rapids. Once in Grand
Rapids, he could start in in the furniture business. Fortunes had been
made that way. Grand Rapids furniture was famous wherever young couples
walked in the evening to talk of home-making. He remembered a sign he
had seen in Chicago as a little boy. His mother had pointed it out to
him as together they walked barefoot through what now is probably the
Loop, begging from door to door. His mother loved the bright flashing of
the electric lights in the sign.

“They are like San Miniato in my native Florence,” she told Scripps.
“Look at them, my son,” she said, “for some day your music will be
played there by the Firenze Symphony Orchestra.”

Scripps had often watched the sign for hours while his mother slept
wrapped in an old shawl on what is now probably the Blackstone Hotel.
The sign had made a great impression on him.

                        LET HARTMAN FEATHER YOUR
                                  NEST

it had said. It flashed in many different colors. First a pure, dazzling
white. That was what Scripps loved best. Then it flashed a lovely green.
Then it flashed red. One night as he lay crouched against his mother’s
body warmth and watched the sign flash, a policeman came up. “You’ll
have to move along,” he said.

Ah, yes, there was big money to be made in the furniture business if you
knew how to go about it. He, Scripps, knew all the wrinkles of that
game. In his own mind it was settled. He would stop at Grand Rapids. The
little bird fluttered, happily now.

“Ah, what a beautiful gilded cage I’ll build for you, my pretty one,”
Scripps said exultantly. The little bird pecked him confidently. Scripps
strode on in the storm. The snow was beginning to drift across the
track. Borne on the wind, there came to Scripps’s ears the sound of a
far-off Indian war-whoop.


                              CHAPTER FOUR

Where was Scripps now? Walking in the night in the storm, he had become
confused. He had started for Chicago after that dreadful night when he
had found that his home was a home no longer. Why had Lucy left? What
had become of Lousy? He, Scripps, did not know. Not that he cared. That
was all behind him. There was none of that now. He was standing
knee-deep in snow in front of a railway station. On the railway station
was written in big letters:

                                PETOSKEY

There were a pile of deer shipped down by hunters from the Upper
Peninsula of Michigan, lying piled the one on the other, dead and stiff
and drifted half over with snow on the station platform. Scripps read
the sign again. Could this be Petoskey?

A man was inside the station, tapping something back of a wicketed
window. He looked out at Scripps. Could he be a telegrapher? Something
told Scripps that he was.

He stepped out of the snow-drift and approached the window. Behind the
window the man worked busily away at his telegrapher’s key.

“Are you a telegrapher?” asked Scripps.

“Yes, sir,” said the man. “I’m a telegrapher.”

“How wonderful!”

The telegrapher eyed him suspiciously. After all, what was this man to
him?

“Is it hard to be a telegrapher?” Scripps asked. He wanted to ask the
man outright if this was Petoskey. He did not know this great northern
section of America, though, and he wished to be polite.

The telegrapher looked at him curiously.

“Say,” he asked, “are you a fairy?”

“No,” Scripps said. “I don’t know what being a fairy means.”

“Well,” said the telegrapher, “what do you carry a bird around for?”

“Bird?” asked Scripps. “What bird?”

“That bird that’s sticking out of your shirt.” Scripps was at a loss.
What sort of chap was this telegrapher? What sort of men went in for
telegraphy? Were they like composers? Were they like artists? Were they
like writers? Were they like the advertising men who write the ads in
our national weeklies? Or were they like Europeans, drawn and wasted by
the war, their best years behind them? Could he tell this telegrapher
the whole story? Would he understand?

“I started home,” he began. “I passed the Mancelona High School—”

“I knew a girl in Mancelona,” the telegrapher said. “Maybe you knew her.
Ethel Enright.”

It was no good going on. He would cut the story short. He would give the
bare essentials. Besides, it was beastly cold. It was cold standing
there on the wind-swept station platform. Something told him it was
useless to go on. He looked over at the deer lying there in a pile,
stiff and cold. Perhaps they, too, had been lovers. Some were bucks and
some were does. The bucks had horns. That was how you could tell. With
cats it is more difficult. In France they geld the cats and do not geld
the horses. France was a long way off.

“My wife left me,” Scripps said abruptly.

“I don’t wonder if you go around with a damn bird sticking out of your
shirt,” the telegrapher said.

“What town is this?” Scripps asked. The single moment of spiritual
communion they had had, had been dissipated. They had never really had
it. But they might have. It was no use now. It was no use trying to
capture what had gone. What had fled.

“Petoskey,” the telegrapher replied.

“Thank you,” Scripps said. He turned and walked into the silent,
deserted Northern town. Luckily, he had four hundred and fifty dollars
in his pocket. He had sold a story to George Horace Lorimer just before
he had started out with his old woman on that drinking trip. Why had he
gone at all? What was it all about, anyway?

Coming toward him down the street came two Indians. They looked at him,
but their faces did not change. Their faces remained the same. They went
into McCarthy’s barber shop.


                              CHAPTER FIVE

Scripps O’Neil stood irresolutely before the barber shop. Inside there
men were being shaved. Other men, no different, were having their hair
cut. Other men sat against the wall in tall chairs and smoked, awaiting
their turn in the barber chairs, admiring the paintings hung on the
wall, or admiring their own reflections in the long mirror. Should he,
Scripps, go in there? After all, he had four hundred and fifty dollars
in his pocket. He could go where he wanted. He looked, once again,
irresolutely. It was an inviting prospect, the society of men, the warm
room, the white jackets of the barbers skillfully snipping away with
their scissors or drawing their blades diagonally through the lather
that covered the face of some man who was getting a shave. They could
use their tools, these barbers. Somehow, it wasn’t what he wanted. He
wanted something different. He wanted to eat. Besides, there was his
bird to look after.

Scripps O’Neil turned his back on the barber shop and strode away up the
street of the silently frozen Northern town. On his right, as he walked,
the weeping birches, their branches bare of leaves, hung down to the
ground, heavy with snow. To his ears came the sound of sleigh bells.
Perhaps it was Christmas. In the South little children would be shooting
off firecrackers and crying “Christmas Gift! Christmas Gift!” to one
another. His father came from the South. He had been a soldier in the
rebel army. ’Way back in Civil War days. Sherman had burned their house
down on his March to the Sea. “War is hell,” Sherman had said. “But you
see how it is, Mrs. O’Neil. I’ve got to do it.” He had touched a match
to the white-pillared old house.

“If General O’Neil were here, you dastard!” his mother had said,
speaking in her broken English, “you’d never have touched a match to
that house.”

Smoke curled up from the old house. The fire was mounting. The white
pillars were obscured in the rising smoke-wreaths. Scripps had held
close to his mother’s linsey-woolsey dress.

General Sherman climbed back onto his horse and made a low bow. “Mrs.
O’Neil,” he said, and Scripps’s mother always said there were tears in
his eyes, even if he was a damned Yank. The man had a heart, sir, even
if he did not follow its dictates. “Mrs. O’Neil, if the general were
here, we could have it out as man to man. As it is, ma’am, war being
what it is, I must burn your house.”

He motioned to one of his soldiers, who ran forward and threw a bucket
of kerosene on the flames. The flames rose and a great column of smoke
went up in the still evening air.

“At least, General Sherman,” Scripps’s mother said triumphantly, “that
column of smoke will warn the other loyal daughters of the Confederacy
that you are coming.”

Sherman bowed. “That is the risk we must take, ma’am.” He clapped spurs
to his horse and rode away, his long white hair floating on the wind.
Neither Scripps nor his mother ever saw him again. Odd that he should
think of that incident now. He looked up. Facing him was a sign:

                      BROWN’S BEANERY THE BEST BY
                                  TEST

He would go in and eat. This was what he wanted. He would go in and eat.
That sign:

                            THE BEST BY TEST

Ah, these big beanery owners were wise fellows. They knew how to get the
customers. No ads in _The Saturday Evening Post_ for them. THE BEST BY
TEST. That was the stuff. He went in.

Inside the door of the beanery Scripps O’Neil looked around him. There
was a long counter. There was a clock. There was a door led into the
kitchen. There were a couple of tables. There were a pile of doughnuts
under a glass cover. There were signs put about on the wall advertising
things one might eat. Was this, after all, Brown’s Beanery?

“I wonder,” Scripps asked an elderly waitress who came in through the
swinging door from the kitchen, “if you could tell me if this is Brown’s
Beanery?”

“Yes, sir,” answered the waitress. “The best by test.”

“Thank you,” Scripps said. He sat down at the counter. “I would like to
have some beans for myself and some for my bird here.”

He opened his shirt and placed the bird on the counter. The bird ruffled
his feathers and shook himself. He pecked inquiringly at the catsup
bottle. The elderly waitress put out a hand and stroked him. “Isn’t he a
manly little fellow?” she remarked. “By the way,” she asked, a little
shamefacedly, “what was it you ordered, sir?”

“Beans,” Scripps said, “for my bird and myself.”

The waitress shoved up a little wicket that led into the kitchen.
Scripps had a glimpse of a warm, steam-filled room, with big pots and
kettles, and many shining cans on the wall.

“A pig and the noisy ones,” the waitress called in a matter-of-fact
voice into the open wicket. “One for a bird!”

“On the fire!” a voice answered from the kitchen.

“How old is your bird?” the elderly waitress asked.

“I don’t know,” Scripps said. “I never saw him before last night. I was
walking on the railroad track from Mancelona. My wife left me.”

“Poor little chap,” the waitress said. She poured a little catsup on her
finger and the bird pecked at it gratefully.

“My wife left me,” Scripps said. “We’d been out drinking on the railroad
track. We used to go out evenings and watch the trains pass. I write
stories. I had a story in _The Post_ and two in _The Dial_. Mencken’s
trying to get ahold of me. I’m too wise for that sort of thing. No
_politzei_ for mine. They give me the _katzenjammers_.”

What was he saying? He was talking wildly. This would never do. He must
pull himself together.

“Scofield Thayer was my best man,” he said. “I’m a Harvard man. All I
want is for them to give me and my bird a square deal. No more
_weltpolitik_. Take Dr. Coolidge away.”

His mind was wandering. He knew what it was. He was faint with hunger.
This Northern air was too sharp, too keen for him.

“I say,” he said. “Could you let me have just a few of those beans. I
don’t like to rush things. I know when to let well enough alone.”

The wicket came up, and a large plate of beans and a small plate of
beans, both steaming, appeared.

“Here they are,” the waitress said.

Scripps fell to on the large plate of beans. There was a little pork,
too. The bird was eating happily, raising its head after each swallow to
let the beans go down.

“He does that to thank God for those beans,” the elderly waitress
explained.

“They’re mighty fine beans, too,” Scripps agreed. Under the influence of
the beans his head was clearing. What was this rot he had been talking
about that man Henry Mencken? Was Mencken really after him? It wasn’t a
pretty prospect to face. He had four hundred and fifty dollars in his
pocket. When that was gone he could always put an end to things. If they
pressed him too far they would get a big surprise. He wasn’t the man to
be taken alive. Just let them try it.

After eating his beans the bird had fallen asleep. He was sleeping on
one leg, the other leg tucked up into his feathers.

“When he gets tired of sleeping on that leg he will change legs and
rest,” the waitress remarked. “We had an old osprey at home that was
like that.”

“Where was your home?” Scripps asked.

“In England. In the Lake District.” The waitress smiled a bit wistfully.
“Wordsworth’s country, you know.”

Ah, these English. They travelled all over the face of the globe. They
were not content to remain in their little island. Strange Nordics,
obsessed with their dream of empire.

“I was not always a waitress,” the elderly waitress remarked.

“I’m sure you weren’t.”

“Not half,” the waitress went on. “It’s rather a strange story. Perhaps
it would bore you?”

“Not at all,” Scripps said. “You wouldn’t mind if I used the story
sometime?”

“Not if you find it interesting,” the waitress smiled. “You wouldn’t use
my name, of course.”

“Not if you’d rather not,” Scripps said. “By the way, could I have
another order of beans?”

“Best by test,” the waitress smiled. Her face was lined and gray. She
looks a little like that actress that died in Pittsburgh. What was her
name? Lenore Ulric. In _Peter Pan_. That was it. They say she always
went about veiled, Scripps thought. There was an interesting woman. Was
it Lenore Ulric? Perhaps not. No matter.

“You really want some more beans?” asked the waitress.

“Yes,” Scripps answered simply.

“Once again on the loud ones,” the waitress called into the wicket. “Lay
off the bird.”

“On the fire,” came the response.

“Please go on with your story,” Scripps said kindly.

“It was the year of the Paris Exposition,” she began. “I was a young
girl at the time, a _jeune fille_, and I came over from England with my
mother. We were going to be present at the opening of the exposition. On
our way from the Gare du Nord to the hotel in the Place Vendôme where we
lodged, we stopped at a coiffeur’s shop and made some trifling purchase.
My mother, as I recall, purchased an additional bottle of ‘smelling
salts,’ as you call them here in America.”

She smiled.

“Yes, go on. Smelling salts,” Scripps said.

“We registered, as is customary, in the hotel, and were given the
adjoining rooms we had reserved. My mother felt a bit done in by the
trip, and we dined in our rooms. I was full of excitement about seeing
the exposition on the morrow. But I was tired after the journey—we had
had a rather nasty crossing—and slept soundly. In the morning I awoke
and called for my mother. There was no answer, and I went into the room
to waken Mummy. Instead of Mummy there was a French general in the bed.”

“Mon Dieu!” Scripps said.

“I was terribly frightened,” the waitress went on, “and rang the bell
for the management. The concierge came up, and I demanded to know where
my mother was.

“‘But, mademoiselle,’ the concierge explained, ‘we know nothing about
your mother. You came here with General So-and-so’—I cannot remember
the general’s name.”

“Call him General Joffre,” Scripps suggested.

“It was a name very like that,” the waitress said. “I was fearfully
frightened and sent for the police, and demanded to see the
guest-register. ‘You’ll find there that I am registered with my mother,’
I said. The police came and the concierge brought up the register. ‘See,
madame,’ he said. ‘You are registered with the general with whom you
came to our hotel last night.’

“I was desperate. Finally, I remembered where the coiffeur’s shop was.
The police sent for the coiffeur. An agent of police brought him in.

“‘I stopped at your shop with my mother,’ I said to the coiffeur, ‘and
my mother bought a bottle of aromatic salts.’

“‘I remember mademoiselle perfectly,’ the coiffeur said. ‘But you were
not with your mother. You were with an elderly French general. He
purchased, I believe, a pair of mustache tongs. My books, at any rate,
will show the purchase.’

“I was in despair. In the meantime the police had brought in the cab
driver who had brought us from the gare to the hotel. He swore that I
had never been with my mother. Tell me, does this story bore you?”

“Go on,” said Scripps. “If you had ever been as hard up for plots as I
have been!”

“Well,” the waitress said. “That’s all there is to the tale. I never saw
my mother again. I communicated with the embassy, but they could do
nothing. It was finally established by them that I had crossed the
channel with my mother, but they could do nothing beyond that.” Tears
came into the elderly waitress’s eyes. “I never saw Mummy again. Never
again. Not even once.”

“What about the general?”

“He finally loaned me one hundred francs—not a great sum even in those
days—and I came to America and became a waitress. That’s all there is
to the story.”

“There’s more than that,” Scripps said. “I’d stake my life there’s more
than that.”

“Sometimes, you know, I feel there is,” the waitress said. “I feel there
must be more than that. Somewhere, somehow, there must be an
explanation. I don’t know what brought the subject into my mind this
morning.”

“It was a good thing to get it off your mind,” Scripps said.

“Yes,” the waitress smiled, the lines in her face not quite so deep now.
“I feel better now.”

“Tell me,” Scripps asked the waitress. “Is there any work in this town
for me and my bird?”

“Honest work?” asked the waitress. “I only know of honest work.”

“Yes, honest work,” Scripps said.

“They do say they’re hiring hands at the new pump-factory,” the waitress
said. Why shouldn’t he work with his hands? Rodin had done it. Cézanne
had been a butcher. Renoir a carpenter. Picasso had worked in a
cigarette-factory in his boyhood. Gilbert Stuart, who painted those
famous portraits of Washington that are reproduced all over this America
of ours and hang in every schoolroom—Gilbert Stuart had been a
blacksmith. Then there was Emerson. Emerson had been a hod-carrier.
James Russell Lowell had been, he had heard, a telegraph operator in his
youth. Like that chap down at the station. Perhaps even now that
telegrapher at the station was working on his “Thanatopsis” or his “To a
Waterfowl.” Why shouldn’t he, Scripps O’Neil, work in a pump-factory?

“You’ll come back again?” the waitress asked.

“If I may,” Scripps said.

“And bring your bird.”

“Yes,” Scripps said. “The little chap’s rather tired now. After all, it
was a hard night for him.”

“I should say it was,” agreed the waitress.

Scripps went out again into the town. He felt clear-headed and ready to
face life. A pump-factory would be interesting. Pumps were big things
now. Fortunes were made and lost in pumps every day in New York in Wall
Street. He knew of a chap who’d cleaned up a cool half-million on pumps
in less than half an hour. They knew what they were about, these big
Wall Street operators.

Outside on the street he looked up at the sign. =Best by
Test=, he read. They had the dope all right, he said. Was it true,
though, that there had been a Negro cook? Just once, just for one
moment, when the wicket went up, he thought he had caught a glimpse of
something black. Perhaps the chap was only sooty from the stove.




                                PART TWO
                         The Struggle for Life


    _And here I solemnly protest I have no intention to vilify or
    asperse any one; for though everything is copied from the book
    of nature, and scarce a character or action produced which I
    have not taken from my own observations or experience; yet I
    have used the utmost care to obscure the persons by such
    different circumstances, degrees, and colors, that it will be
    impossible to guess at them with any degree of certainty; and if
    it ever happens otherwise, it is only where the failure
    characterized is so minute, that it is a foible only which the
    party himself may laugh at as well as any other._

                                                      HENRY FIELDING


                              CHAPTER SIX

Scripps O’Neil was looking for employment. It would be good to work with
his hands. He walked down the street away from the beanery and past
McCarthy’s barber shop. He did not go into the barber shop. It looked as
inviting as ever, but it was employment Scripps wanted. He turned
sharply around the corner of the barber shop and onto the Main Street of
Petoskey. It was a handsome, broad street, lined on either side with
brick and pressed-stone buildings. Scripps walked along it toward the
part of town where the pump-factory stood. At the door of the
pump-factory he was embarrassed. Could this really be the pump-factory?
True, a stream of pumps were being carried out and set up in the snow,
and workmen were throwing pails of water over them to encase them in a
coating of ice that would protect them from the winter winds as well as
any paint would. But were they really pumps? It might all be a trick.
These pump men were clever fellows.

“I say!” Scripps beckoned to one of the workmen who was sloshing water
over a new, raw-looking pump that had just been carried out and stood
protestingly in the snow. “Are they pumps?”

“They will be in time,” the workman said.

Scripps knew it was the factory. They weren’t going to fool him on that.
He walked up to the door. There was a sign on it:

                        KEEP OUT. THIS MEANS YOU

Can that mean me? Scripps wondered. He knocked on the door and went in.

“I’d like to speak to the manager,” he said, standing quietly in the
half-light.

Workmen were passing him, carrying the new raw pumps on their shoulders.
They hummed snatches of songs as they passed. The handles of the pumps
flopped stiffly in dumb protest. Some pumps had no handles. They
perhaps, after all, are the lucky ones, Scripps thought. A little man
came up to him. He was well-built, short, with wide shoulders and a grim
face.

“You were asking for the manager?”

“Yes, sir.”

“I’m the foreman here. What I say goes.”

“Can you hire and fire?” Scripps asked.

“I can do one as easily as the other,” the foreman said.

“I want a job.”

“Any experience?”

“Not in pumps.”

“All right,” the foreman said. “We’ll put you on piece-work. Here,
Yogi,” he called to one of the men, who was standing looking out of the
window of the factory, “show this new chum where to stow his swag and
how to find his way around these diggings.” The foreman looked Scripps
up and down. “I’m an Australian,” he said. “Hope you’ll like the lay
here.” He walked off.

The man called Yogi Johnson came over from the window. “Glad to meet
you,” he said. He was a chunky, well-built fellow. One of the sort you
see around almost anywhere. He looked as though he had been through
things.

“Your foreman’s the first Australian I’ve ever met,” Scripps said.

“Oh, he’s not an Australian,” Yogi said. “He was just with the
Australians once during the war, and it made a big impression on him.”

“Were you in the war?” Scripps asked.

“Yes,” Yogi Johnson said. “I was the first man to go from Cadillac.”

“It must have been quite an experience.”

“It’s meant a lot to me,” Yogi answered. “Come on and I’ll show you
around the works.”

Scripps followed this man, who showed him through the pump-factory. It
was dark but warm inside the pump-factory. Men naked to the waist took
the pumps in huge tongs as they came trundling by on an endless chain,
culling out the misfits and placing the perfect pumps on another endless
chain that carried them up into the cooling room. Other men, Indians for
the most part, wearing only breech-clouts, broke up the misfit pumps
with huge hammers and adzes and rapidly recast them into axe heads,
wagon springs, trombone slides, bullet moulds, all the by-products of a
big pump-factory. There was nothing wasted, Yogi pointed out. A group of
Indian boys, humming to themselves one of the old tribal chanties,
squatted in a corner of the big forging room shaping the little
fragments that were chipped from the pumps in casting, into safety razor
blades.

“They work naked,” Yogi said. “They’re searched as they go out.
Sometimes they try and conceal the razor blades and take them out with
them to bootleg.”

“There must be quite a loss that way,” Scripps said.

“Oh, no,” Yogi answered. “The inspectors get most of them.”

Upstairs, apart in a separate room, two old men were working. Yogi
opened the door. One of the old men looked over his steel spectacles and
frowned.

“You make a draft,” he said.

“Shut the door,” the other old man said, in the high, complaining voice
of the very old.

“They’re our two hand-workers,” Yogi said. “They make all the pumps the
manufactory sends out to the big international pump races. You remember
our Peerless Pounder that won the pump race in Italy, where Franky
Dawson was killed?”

“I read about it in the paper,” Scripps answered.

“Mr. Borrow, over there in the corner, made the Peerless Pounder all
himself by hand,” Yogi said.

“I carved it direct from the steel with this knife.” Mr. Borrow held up
a short-bladed, razorlike-looking knife. “Took me eighteen months to get
it right.”

“The Peerless Pounder was quite a pump all right,” the high-voiced
little old man said. “But we’re working on one now that will show its
heels to any of them foreign pumps, aren’t we, Henry?”

“That’s Mr. Shaw,” Yogi said in an undertone. “He’s probably the
greatest living pump-maker.”

“You boys get along and leave us alone,” Mr. Borrow said. He was carving
away steadily, his infirm old hands shaking a little between strokes.

“Let the boys watch,” Mr. Shaw said. “Where you from, young feller?”

“I’ve just come from Mancelona,” Scripps answered. “My wife left me.”

“Well, you won’t have no difficulty finding another one,” Mr. Shaw said.
“You’re a likely-looking young feller. But take my advice and take your
time. A poor wife ain’t much better than no wife at all.”

“I wouldn’t say that, Henry,” Mr. Borrow remarked in his high voice.
“Any wife at all’s a pretty good wife the way things are going now.”

“You take my advice, young feller, and go slow. Get yourself a good one
this time.”

“Henry knows a thing or two,” Mr. Borrow said. “He knows what he’s
talking about there.” He laughed a high, cackling laugh. Mr. Shaw, the
old pump-maker, blushed.

“You boys get along and leave us get on with our pump-making,” he said.
“Henry and me here, we got a sight of work to do.”

“I’m very glad to have met you,” Scripps said.

“Come on,” Yogi said. “I better get you started or the foreman will be
on my tail.”

He put Scripps to work collaring pistons in the piston-collaring room.
There Scripps worked for almost a year. In some ways it was the happiest
year of his life. In other ways it was a nightmare. A hideous nightmare.
In the end he grew to like it. In other ways he hated it. Before he knew
it, a year had passed. He was still collaring pistons. But what strange
things had happened in that year. Often he wondered about them. As he
wondered, collaring a piston now almost automatically, he listened to
the laughter that came up from below, where the little Indian lads were
shaping what were to be razor blades. As he listened something rose in
his throat and almost choked him.


                             CHAPTER SEVEN

That night, after his first day in the pump-factory, the first day in
what was or were to become an endless succession of days of dull
piston-collaring, Scripps went again to the beanery to eat. All day he
had kept his bird concealed. Something told him that the pump-factory
was not the place to bring his bird out in. During the day the bird had
several times made him uncomfortable, but he had adjusted his clothes to
it and even cut a little slit the bird could poke his beak out through
in search of fresh air. Now the day’s work was over. It was finished.
Scripps on his way to the beanery. Scripps happy that he was working
with his hands. Scripps thinking of the old pump-makers. Scripps going
to the society of the friendly waitress. Who was that waitress, anyway?
What was it had happened to her in Paris? He must find out more about
this Paris. Yogi Johnson had been there. He would quiz Yogi. Get him to
talk. Draw him out. Make him tell what he knew. He knew a trick or two
about that.

Watching the sunset out over the Petoskey Harbor, the lake now frozen
and great blocks of ice jutting up over the breakwater, Scripps strode
down the streets of Petoskey to the beanery. He would have liked to ask
Yogi Johnson to eat with him, but he didn’t dare. Not yet. That would
come later. All in good time. No need to rush matters with a man like
Yogi. Who was Yogi, anyway? Had he really been in the war? What had the
war meant to him? Was he really the first man to enlist from Cadillac?
Where was Cadillac, anyway? Time would tell.

Scripps O’Neil opened the door and went into the beanery. The elderly
waitress got up from the chair where she had been reading the overseas
edition of _The Manchester Guardian_, and put the paper and her
steel-rimmed spectacles on top of the cash register.

“Good evening,” she said simply. “It’s good to have _you_ back.”

Something stirred inside Scripps O’Neil. A feeling that he could not
define came within him.

“I’ve been working all day long”—he looked at the elderly
waitress—“for _you_,” he added.

“How lovely!” she said. And then smiled shyly. “And I have been working
all day long—for _you_.”

Tears came into Scripps’s eyes. Something stirred inside him again. He
reached forward to take the elderly waitress’s hand, and with quiet
dignity she laid it within his own. “You are my woman,” he said. Tears
came into her eyes, too.

“You are my man,” she said.

“Once again I say: you are my woman.” Scripps pronounced the words
solemnly. Something had broken inside him again. He felt he could not
keep from crying.

“Let this be our wedding ceremony,” the elderly waitress said. Scripps
pressed her hand. “You are my woman,” he said simply.

“You are my man and more than my man.” She looked into his eyes. “You
are all of America to me.”

“Let us go,” Scripps said.

“Have you your bird?” asked the waitress, laying aside her apron and
folding the copy of _The Manchester Guardian Weekly_. “I’ll bring _The
Guardian_, if you don’t mind,” she said, wrapping the paper in her
apron. “It’s a new paper and I’ve not read it yet.”

“I’m very fond of _The Guardian_,” Scripps said. “My family have taken
it ever since I can remember. My father was a great admirer of
Gladstone.”

“My father went to Eton with Gladstone,” the elderly waitress said. “And
now I am ready.”

She had donned a coat and stood ready, her apron, her steel-rimmed
spectacles in their worn black morocco case, her copy of _The Manchester
Guardian_ held in her hand.

“Have you no hat?” asked Scripps.

“No.”

“Then I will buy you one,” Scripps said tenderly.

“It will be your wedding gift,” the elderly waitress said. Again there
were tears shone in her eyes.

“And now let us go,” Scripps said.

The elderly waitress came out from behind the counter, and together,
hand in hand, they strode out into the night.

Inside the beanery the black cook pushed up the wicket and looked
through from the kitchen. “Dey’ve gone off,” he chuckled. “Gone off into
de night. Well, well, well.” He closed the wicket softly. Even he was a
little impressed.


                             CHAPTER EIGHT

Half an hour later Scripps O’Neil and the elderly waitress returned to
the beanery as man and wife. The beanery looked much the same. There was
the long counter, the salt cellars, the sugar containers, the catsup
bottle, the Worcestershire Sauce bottle. There was the wicket that led
into the kitchen. Behind the counter was the relief waitress. She was a
buxom, jolly-looking girl, and she wore a white apron. At the counter,
reading a Detroit paper, sat a drummer. The drummer was eating a T-bone
steak and hashed-brown potatoes. Something very beautiful had happened
to Scripps and the elderly waitress. Now they were hungry. They wished
to eat.

The elderly waitress looking at Scripps. Scripps looking at the elderly
waitress. The drummer reading his paper and occasionally putting a
little catsup on his hashed-brown potatoes. The other waitress, Mandy,
back of the counter in her freshly starched white apron. The frost on
the windows. The warmth inside. The cold outside. Scripps’s bird, rather
rumpled now, sitting on the counter and preening his feathers.

“So you’ve come back,” Mandy the waitress said. “The cook said you had
gone out into the night.”

The elderly waitress looked at Mandy, her eyes brightened, her voice
calm and now of a deeper, richer timbre.

“We are man and wife now,” she said kindly. “We have just been married.
What would you like to eat for supper, Scripps, dear?”

“I don’t know,” Scripps said. He felt vaguely uneasy. Something was
stirring within him.

“Perhaps you have eaten enough of the beans, dear Scripps,” the elderly
waitress, now his wife, said. The drummer looked up from his paper.
Scripps noticed that it was the Detroit _News_. There was a fine paper.

“That’s a fine paper you’re reading,” Scripps said to the drummer.

“It’s a good paper, the _News_,” the drummer said. “You two on your
honeymoon?”

“Yes,” Mrs. Scripps said; “we are man and wife now.”

“Well,” said the drummer, “that’s a mighty fine thing to be. I’m a
married man myself.”

“Are you?” said Scripps. “My wife left me. It was in Mancelona.”

“Don’t let’s talk of that any more, Scripps, dear,” Mrs. Scripps said.
“You’ve told that story so many times.”

“Yes, dear,” Scripps agreed. He felt vaguely mistrustful of himself.
Something, somewhere was stirring inside of him. He looked at the
waitress called Mandy, standing robust and vigorously lovely in her
newly starched white apron. He watched her hands, healthy, calm, capable
hands, doing the duties of her waitresshood.

“Try one of these T-bones with hashed-brown potatoes,” the drummer
suggested. “They got a nice T-bone here.”

“Would you like one, dear?” Scripps asked his wife.

“I’ll just take a bowl of milk and crackers,” the elderly Mrs. Scripps
said. “You have whatever you want, dear.”

“Here’s your crackers and milk, Diana,” Mandy said, placing them on the
counter. “Do you want a T-bone, sir?”

“Yes,” Scripps said. Something stirred again within him.

“Well done or rare?”

“Rare, please.”

The waitress turned and called into the wicket: “Tea for one. Let it go
raw!”

“Thank you,” Scripps said. He eyed the waitress Mandy. She had a gift
for the picturesque in speech, that girl. It had been that very
picturesque quality in her speech that had first drawn him to his
present wife. That and her strange background. England, the Lake
Country. Scripps striding through the Lake Country with Wordsworth. A
field of golden daffodils. The wind blowing at Windermere. Far off,
perhaps, a stag at bay. Ah, that was farther north, in Scotland. They
were a hardy race, those Scots, deep in their mountain fastnesses. Harry
Lauder and his pipe. The Highlanders in the Great War. Why had not he,
Scripps, been in the war? That was where that chap Yogi Johnson had it
on him. The war would have meant much to him, Scripps. Why hadn’t he
been in it? Why hadn’t he heard of it in time? Perhaps he was too old.
Look at that old French General Joffre, though. Surely he was a younger
man than that old general. General Foch praying for victory. The French
troops kneeling along the Chemin des Dames, praying for victory. The
Germans with their “_Gott mit uns_.” What a mockery. Surely he was no
older than that French General Foch. He wondered.

Mandy, the waitress, placed his T-bone steak and hashed-brown potatoes
on the counter before him. As she laid the plate down, just for an
instant, her hand touched his. Scripps felt a strange thrill go through
him. Life was before him. He was not an old man. Why were there no wars
now? Perhaps there were. Men were fighting in China, Chinamen, Chinamen
killing one another. What for? Scripps wondered. What was it all about,
anyway?

Mandy, the buxom waitress, leaned forward. “Say,” she said, “did I ever
tell you about the last words of Henry James?”

“Really, dear Mandy,” Mrs. Scripps said, “you’ve told that story rather
often.”

“Let’s hear it,” Scripps said. “I’m very interested in Henry James.”
Henry James, Henry James. That chap who had gone away from his own land
to live in England among Englishmen. Why had he done it? For what had he
left America? Weren’t his roots here? His brother William. Boston.
Pragmatism. Harvard University. Old John Harvard with silver buckles on
his shoes. Charley Brickley. Eddie Mahan. Where were they now?

“Well,” Mandy began, “Henry James became a British subject on his
death-bed. At once, as soon as the king heard Henry James had become a
British subject he sent around the highest decoration in his power to
bestow—the Order of Merit.”

“The O. M.,” the elderly Mrs. Scripps explained.

“That was it,” the waitress said. “Professors Gosse and Saintsbury came
with the man who brought the decoration. Henry James was lying on his
death-bed, and his eyes were shut. There was a single candle on a table
beside the bed. The nurse allowed them to come near the bed, and they
put the ribbon of the decoration around James’s neck, and the decoration
lay on the sheet over Henry James’s chest. Professors Gosse and
Saintsbury leaned forward and smoothed the ribbon of the decoration.
Henry James never opened his eyes. The nurse told them they all must go
out of the room, and they all went out of the room. When they were all
gone, Henry James spoke to the nurse. He never opened his eyes. ‘Nurse,’
Henry James said, ‘put out the candle, nurse, and spare my blushes.’
Those were the last words he ever spoke.”

“James was quite a writer,” Scripps O’Neil said. He was strangely moved
by the story.

“You don’t always tell it the same way, dear,” Mrs. Scripps remarked to
Mandy. There were tears in Mandy’s eyes. “I feel very strongly about
Henry James,” she said.

“What was the matter with James?” asked the drummer. “Wasn’t America
good enough for him?”

Scripps O’Neil was thinking about Mandy, the waitress. What a background
she must have, that girl! What a fund of anecdotes! A chap could go far
with a woman like that to help him! He stroked the little bird that sat
on the lunch-counter before him. The bird pecked at his finger. Was the
little bird a hawk? A falcon, perhaps, from one of the big Michigan
falconries. Was it perhaps a robin? Pulling and tugging at the early
worm on some green lawn somewhere? He wondered.

“What do you call your bird?” the drummer asked.

“I haven’t named him yet. What would you call him?”

“Why not call him Ariel?” Mandy asked.

“Or Puck,” Mrs. Scripps put in.

“What’s it mean?” asked the drummer.

“It’s a character out of Shakespeare,” Mandy explained.

“Oh, give the bird a chance.”

“What would you call him?” Scripps turned to the drummer.

“He ain’t a parrot, is he?” asked the drummer. “If he was a parrot you
could call him Polly.”

“There’s a character in ‘The Beggar’s Opera’ called Polly,” Mandy
explained.

Scripps wondered. Perhaps the bird was a parrot. A parrot strayed from
some comfortable home with some old maid. The untilled soil of some New
England spinster.

“Better wait till you see how he turns out,” the drummer advised. “You
got plenty of time to name him.”

This drummer had sound ideas. He, Scripps, did not even know what sex
the bird was. Whether he was a boy bird or a girl bird.

“Wait till you see if he lays eggs,” the drummer suggested. Scripps
looked into the drummer’s eyes. The fellow had voiced his own unspoken
thought.

“You know a thing or two, drummer,” he said.

“Well,” the drummer admitted modestly, “I ain’t drummed all these years
for nothing.”

“You’re right there, pal,” Scripps said.

“That’s a nice bird you got there, brother,” the drummer said. “You want
to hang onto that bird.”

Scripps knew it. Ah, these drummers know a thing or two. Going up and
down over the face of this great America of ours. These drummers kept
their eyes open. They were no fools.

“Listen,” the drummer said. He pushed his derby hat off his brow and,
leaning forward, spat into the tall brass cuspidor that stood beside his
stool. “I want to tell you about a pretty beautiful thing that happened
to me once in Bay City.”

Mandy, the waitress, leaned forward. Mrs. Scripps leaned toward the
drummer to hear better. The drummer looked apologetically at Scripps and
stroked the bird with his forefinger.

“Tell you about it some other time, brother,” he said. Scripps
understood. From out of the kitchen, through the wicket in the hall,
came a high-pitched, haunting laugh. Scripps listened. Could that be the
laughter of the Negro? He wondered.


                              CHAPTER NINE

Scripps going slowly to work in the pump-factory in the mornings. Mrs.
Scripps looking out of the window and watching him go up the street. Not
much time for reading _The Guardian_ now. Not much time for reading
about English politics. Not much time for worrying about the cabinet
crises over there in France. The French were a strange people. Joan of
Arc. Eva le Gallienne. Clemenceau. Georges Carpentier. Sacha Guitry.
Yvonne Printemps. Grock. Les Fratellinis. Gilbert Seldes. _The Dial._
_The Dial_ Prize. Marianne Moore. E. E. Cummings. _The Enormous Room.
Vanity Fair._ Frank Crowninshield. What was it all about? Where was it
taking her?

She had a man now. A man of her own. For her own. Could she keep him?
Could she hold him for her own? She wondered.

Mrs. Scripps, formerly an elderly waitress, now the wife of Scripps
O’Neil, with a good job in the pump-factory. Diana Scripps. Diana was
her own name. It had been her mother’s, too. Diana Scripps looking into
the mirror and wondering could she hold him. It was getting to be a
question. Why had he ever met Mandy? Would she have the courage to break
off going to the restaurant with Scripps to eat? She couldn’t do that.
He would go alone. She knew that. It was no use trying to pull wool over
her own eyes. He would go alone and he would talk with Mandy. Diana
looked into the mirror. Could she hold him? Could she hold him? That
thought never left her now.

Every night at the restaurant, she couldn’t call it a beanery now—that
made a lump come in her throat and made her throat feel hard and choky.
Every night at the restaurant now Scripps and Mandy talked together. The
girl was trying to take him away. Him, her Scripps. Trying to take him
away. Take him away. Could she, Diana, hold him?

She was no better than a slut, that Mandy. Was that the way to do? Was
that the thing to do? Go after another woman’s man? Come between man and
wife? Break up a home? And all with these interminable literary
reminiscences. These endless anecdotes. Scripps was fascinated by Mandy.
Diana admitted that to herself. But she might hold him. That was all
that mattered now. To hold him. To hold him. Not to let him go. Make him
stay. She looked into the mirror.

Diana subscribing for _The Forum_. Diana reading _The Mentor_. Diana
reading William Lyon Phelps in _Scribner’s_. Diana walking through the
frozen streets of the silent Northern town to the Public Library, to
read _The Literary Digest_ “Book Review.” Diana waiting for the postman
to come, bringing _The Bookman_. Diana, in the snow, waiting for the
postman to bring _The Saturday Review of Literature_. Diana, bareheaded
now, standing in the mounting snow-drifts, waiting for the postman to
bring her the New York _Times_ “Literary Section.” Was it doing any
good? Was it holding him?

At first it seemed to be. Diana learned editorials by John Farrar by
heart. Scripps brightened. A little of the old light shining in
Scripps’s eyes now. Then it died. Some little mistake in the wording,
some slip in her understanding of a phrase, some divergence in her
attitude, made it all ring false. She would go on. She was not beaten.
He was her man and she would hold him. She looked away from the window
and slit open the covering of the magazine that lay on her table. It was
_Harper’s Magazine_. _Harper’s Magazine_ in a new format. _Harper’s
Magazine_ completely changed and revised. Perhaps that would do the
trick. She wondered.


                              CHAPTER TEN

Spring was coming. Spring was in the air. (Author’s Note.—This is the
same day on which the story starts, back on page three.) A chinook wind
was blowing. Workmen were coming home from the factory. Scripps’s bird
singing in its cage. Diana looking out of the open window. Diana
watching for her Scripps to come up the street. Could she hold him?
Could she hold him? If she couldn’t hold him, would he leave her his
bird? She had felt lately that she couldn’t hold him. In the nights,
now, when she touched Scripps he rolled away, not toward her. It was a
little sign, but life was made up of little signs. She felt she couldn’t
hold him. As she looked out of the window, a copy of _The Century
Magazine_ dropped from her nerveless hand. _The Century_ had a new
editor. There were more woodcuts. Glenn Frank had gone to head some
great university somewhere. There were more Van Dorens on the magazine.
Diana felt that might turn the trick. Happily she had opened _The
Century_ and read all morning. Then the wind, the warm chinook wind, had
started to blow, and she knew Scripps would soon be home. Men were
coming down the street in increasing numbers. Was Scripps among them?
She did not like to put on her spectacles to look. She wanted Scripps’s
first glimpse of her to be of her at her best. As she felt him drawing
nearer, the confidence she had had in _The Century_ grew fainter. She
had so hoped that would give her the something which would hold him. She
wasn’t sure now.

Scripps coming down the street with a crowd of excited workmen. Men
stirred by the spring. Scripps swinging his lunch-bucket. Scripps waving
good-by to the workmen, who trooped one by one into what had formerly
been a saloon. Scripps not looking up at the window. Scripps coming up
the stairs. Scripps coming nearer. Scripps coming nearer. Scripps here.

“Good afternoon, dear Scripps,” she said. “I’ve been reading a story by
Ruth Suckow.”

“Hello, Diana,” Scripps answered. He set down his lunch-pail. She looked
worn and old. He could afford to be polite.

“What was the story about, Diana?” he asked.

“It was about a little girl in Iowa,” Diana said. She moved toward him.
“It was about people on the land. It reminded me a little of my own Lake
Country.”

“That so?” asked Scripps. In some ways the pump-factory had hardened
him. His speech had become more clipped. More like these hardy Northern
workers’. But his mind was the same.

“Would you like me to read a little of it out loud?” Diana asked.
“They’re some lovely woodcuts.”

“How about going down to the beanery?” Scripps said.

“As you wish, dear,” Diana said. Then her voice broke. “I wish—oh, I
wish you’d never seen that place!” She wiped away her tears. Scripps had
not even seen them. “I’ll bring the bird, dear,” Diana said. “He hasn’t
been out all day.”

Together they went down the street to the beanery. They did not walk
hand in hand now. They walked like what are called old married people.
Mrs. Scripps carried the bird-cage. The bird was happy in the warm wind.
Men lurching along, drunk with the spring, passed them. Many spoke to
Scripps. He was well known and well liked in the town now. Some, as they
lurched by, raised their hats to Mrs. Scripps. She responded vaguely. If
I can only hold him, she was thinking. If I can only hold him. As they
walked along the slushy snow of the narrow sidewalk of the Northern
town, something began to beat in her head. Perhaps it was the rhythm of
their walking together. I can’t hold him. I can’t hold him. I can’t hold
him.

Scripps took her arm as they crossed the street. When his hand touched
her arm Diana knew it was true. She would never hold him. A group of
Indians passed them on the street. Were they laughing at her or was it
some tribal jest? Diana didn’t know. All she knew was that rhythm that
beat into her brain. I can’t hold him. I can’t hold him.

    AUTHOR’S NOTE:

    _For the reader, not the printer. What difference does it make
    to the printer? Who is the printer, anyway? Gutenberg. The
    Gutenberg Bible. Caxton. Twelve-point open-face Caslon. The
    linotype machine. The author as a little boy being sent to look
    for type lice. The author as a young man being sent for the key
    to the forms. Ah, they knew a trick or two, these printers._

(In case the reader is becoming confused, we are now up to where the
story opened with Yogi Johnson and Scripps O’Neil in the pump-factory
itself, with the chinook wind blowing. As you see, Scripps O’Neil has
now come out of the pump-factory and is on his way to the beanery with
his wife, who is afraid she cannot hold him. Personally, we don’t
believe she can, but the reader will see for himself. We will now leave
the couple on their way to the beanery and go back and take up Yogi
Johnson. We want the reader to like Yogi Johnson. The story will move a
little faster from now on, in case any of the readers are tiring. We
will also try and work in a number of good anecdotes. Would it be any
violation of confidence if we told the reader that we get the best of
these anecdotes from Mr. Ford Madox Ford? We owe him our thanks, and we
hope the reader does, too. At any rate, we will now go on with Yogi
Johnson. Yogi Johnson, the reader may remember, is the chap who was in
the war. As the story opens, he is just coming out of the pump-factory.
(See page three.)

It is very hard to write this way, beginning things backward, and the
author hopes the reader will realize this and not grudge this little
word of explanation. I know I would be very glad to read anything the
reader ever wrote, and I hope the reader will make the same sort of
allowances. If any of the readers would care to send me anything they
ever wrote, for criticism or advice, I am always at the Café du Dôme any
afternoon, talking about Art with Harold Stearns and Sinclair Lewis, and
the reader can bring his stuff along with him, or he can send it to me
care of my bank, if I have a bank. Now, if the reader is ready—and
understand, I don’t want to rush the reader any—we will go back to Yogi
Johnson. But please remember that, while we have gone back to Yogi
Johnson, Scripps O’Neil and his wife are on their way to the beanery.
What will happen to them there I don’t know. I only wish the reader
could help me.)




                               PART THREE
                  Men in War and the Death of Society


    _It may be likewise noted that affectation does not imply an
    absolute negation of those qualities which are affected; and
    therefore, though, when it proceeds from hypocrisy, it be nearly
    allied to deceit; yet when it comes from vanity only, it
    partakes of the nature of ostentation: for instance, the
    affectation of liberality in a vain man differs visibly from the
    same affectation in the avaricious, for though the vain man is
    not what he would appear, or hath not the virtue he affects, to
    the degree he would be thought to have it; yet it sits less
    awkwardly on him than on the avaricious man, who is the very
    reverse of what he would seem to be._

                                                      HENRY FIELDING


                             CHAPTER ELEVEN

Yogi Johnson walked out of the workmen’s entrance of the pump-factory
and down the street. Spring was in the air. The snow was melting, and
the gutters were running with snow-water. Yogi Johnson walked down the
middle of the street, keeping on the as yet unmelted ice. He turned to
the left and crossed the bridge over Bear River. The ice had already
melted in the river and he watched the swirling brown current. Below,
beside the stream, buds on the willow brush were coming out green.

It’s a real chinook wind, Yogi thought. The foreman did right to let the
men go. It wouldn’t be safe keeping them in a day like this. Anything
might happen. The owner of the factory knew a thing or two. When the
chinook blew, the thing to do was to get the men out of the factory.
Then, if any of them were injured, it was not on him. He didn’t get
caught under the Employer’s Liability Act. They knew a thing or two,
these big pump-manufacturers. They were smart, all right.

Yogi was worried. There was something on his mind. It was spring, there
was no doubt of that now, and he did not want a woman. He had worried
about it a lot lately. There was no question about it. He did not want a
woman. He couldn’t explain it to himself. He had gone to the Public
Library and asked for a book the night before. He looked at the
librarian. He did not want her. Somehow, she meant nothing to him. At
the restaurant where he had a meal ticket he looked hard at the waitress
who brought him his meals. He did not want her, either. He passed a
group of girls on their way home from high school. He looked carefully
at all of them. He did not want a single one. Decidedly something was
wrong. Was he going to pieces? Was this the end?

Well, Yogi thought, women are gone, perhaps, though I hope not; but I
still have my love of horses. He was walking up the steep hill that
leads up from the Bear River out onto the Charlevoix road. The road was
not really so steep, but it felt steep to Yogi, his legs heavy with the
spring. In front of him was a grain and feed store. A team of beautiful
horses were hitched in front of the feed store. Yogi went up to them. He
wanted to touch them. To reassure himself that there was something left.
The nigh horse looked at him as he came near. Yogi put his hand in his
pocket for a lump of sugar. He had no sugar. The horse put its ears back
and showed its teeth. The other horse jerked its head away. Was this all
that his love of horses had brought him? After all, perhaps there was
something wrong with these horses. Perhaps they had glanders or spavin.
Perhaps something had been caught in the tender frog of their hoof.
Perhaps they were lovers.

Yogi walked on up the hill and turned to the left onto the Charlevoix
road. He passed the last houses of the outskirts of Petoskey and came
out onto the open country road. On his right was a field that stretched
to Little Traverse Bay. The blue of the bay opening out into the big
Lake Michigan. Across the bay the pine hills behind Harbor Springs.
Beyond, where you could not see it, Cross Village, where the Indians
lived. Even further beyond, the Straits of Mackinac with St. Ignace,
where a strange and beautiful thing had once happened to Oscar Gardner,
who worked beside Yogi in the pump-factory. Further beyond, the Soo,
both Canadian and American. There the wilder spirits of Petoskey
sometimes went to drink beer. They were happy then. ’Way, ’way beyond,
and, in the other direction, at the foot of the lake was Chicago, where
Scripps O’Neil had started for on that eventful night when his first
marriage had become a marriage no longer. Near there Gary, Indiana,
where were the great steel mills. Near there Hammond, Indiana. Near
there Michigan City, Indiana. Further beyond, there would be
Indianapolis, Indiana, where Booth Tarkington lived. He had the wrong
dope, that fellow. Further down there would be Cincinnati, Ohio. Beyond
that, Vicksburg, Mississippi. Beyond that, Waco, Texas. Ah! there was
grand sweep to this America of ours.

Yogi walked across the road and sat down on a pile of logs, where he
could look out over the lake. After all, the war was over and he was
still alive.

There was a chap in that fellow Anderson’s book that the librarian had
given him at the library last night. Why hadn’t he wanted the librarian,
anyway? Could it be because he thought she might have false teeth? Could
it be something else? Would a little child ever tell her? He didn’t
know. What was the librarian to him, anyway?

This chap in the book by Anderson. He had been a soldier, too. He had
been at the front two years, Anderson said. What was his name? Fred
Something. This Fred had thoughts dancing in his brain—horror. One
night, in the time of the fighting, he went out on parade—no, it was
patrol—in No Man’s Land, and saw another man stumbling along in the
darkness and shot him. The man pitched forward dead. It had been the
only time Fred consciously killed a man. You don’t kill men in war much,
the book said. The hell you don’t, Yogi thought, if you’re two years in
the infantry at the front. They just die. Indeed they do, Yogi thought.
Anderson said the act was rather hysterical on Fred’s part. He and the
men with him might have made the fellow surrender. They had all got the
jimjams. After it happened they all ran away together. Where the hell
did they run to? Yogi wondered. Paris?

Afterward, killing this man haunted Fred. It’s got to be sweet and true.
That was the way the soldiers thought, Anderson said. The hell it was.
This Fred was supposed to have been two years in an infantry regiment at
the front.

A couple of Indians were passing along the road, grunting to themselves
and to each other. Yogi called to them. The Indians came over.

“Big white chief got chew of tobacco?” asked the first Indian.

“White chief carry liquor?” the second Indian asked.

Yogi handed them a package of Peerless and his pocket flask.

“White chief heap big medicine,” the Indians grunted.

“Listen,” Yogi Johnson said. “I am about to address to you a few remarks
about the war. A subject on which I feel very deeply.” The Indians sat
down on the logs. One of the Indians pointed at the sky. “Up there
gitchy Manitou the Mighty,” he said.

The other Indian winked at Yogi. “White chief no believe every goddam
thing he hear,” he grunted.

“Listen,” Yogi Johnson said. And he told them about the war.

War hadn’t been that way to Yogi, he told the Indians. War had been to
him like football. American football. What they play at the colleges.
Carlisle Indian School. Both the Indians nodded. They had been to
Carlisle.

Yogi had played centre at football and war had been much the same thing,
intensely unpleasant. When you played football and had the ball, you
were down with your legs spread out and the ball held out in front of
you on the ground; you had to listen for the signal, decode it, and make
the proper pass. You had to think about it all the time. While your
hands were on the ball the opposing centre stood in front of you, and
when you passed the ball he brought his hand up smash into your face and
grabbed you with the other hand under the chin or under your armpit, and
tried to pull you forward or shove you back to make a hole he could go
through and break up the play. You were supposed to charge forward so
hard you banged him out of the play with your body and put you both on
the ground. He had all the advantage. It was not what you would call
fun. When you had the ball he had all the advantage. The only good thing
was that when he had the ball you could rough-house _him_. In this way
things evened up and sometimes even a certain tolerance was achieved.
Football, like the war, was unpleasant; stimulating and exciting after
you had attained a certain hardness, and the chief difficulty had been
that of remembering the signals. Yogi was thinking about the war, not
the army. He meant combat. The army was something different. You could
take it and ride with it or you could buck the tiger and let it smash
you. The army was a silly business, but the war was different.

Yogi was not haunted by men he had killed. He knew he had killed five
men. Probably he had killed more. He didn’t believe men you killed
haunted you. Not if you had been two years at the front. Most of the men
he had known had been excited as hell when they had first killed. The
trouble was to keep them from killing too much. It was hard to get
prisoners back to the people that wanted them for identification. You
sent a man back with two prisoners; maybe you sent two men back with
four prisoners. What happened? The men came back and said the prisoners
were knocked out by the barrage. They would give the prisoner a poke in
the seat of the pants with a bayonet, and when the prisoner jumped they
would say, “You would run, you son of a bitch,” and let their gun off in
the back of his head. They wanted to be sure they had killed. Also they
didn’t want to go back through any damn barrage. No, sir. They learned
those kind of manners from the Australians. After all, what were those
Jerries? A bunch of goddam Huns. “Huns” sounded like a funny word now.
All this sweetness and truth. Not if you were in there two years. In the
end they would have softened. Got sorry for excesses and begun to store
up good deeds against getting killed themselves. But that was the fourth
phase of soldiering, the gentling down.

In a good soldier in the war it went like this: First, you were brave
because you didn’t think anything could hit you, because you yourself
were something special, and you knew that you could never die. Then you
found out different. You were really scared then, but if you were a good
soldier you functioned the same as before. Then after you were wounded
and not killed, with new men coming on, and going through your old
processes, you hardened and became a good hard-boiled soldier. Then came
the second crack, which is much worse than the first, and then you began
doing good deeds, and being the boy Sir Philip Sidney, and storing up
treasures in heaven. At the same time, of course, functioning always the
same as before. As if it were a football game.

Nobody had any damn business to write about it, though, that didn’t at
least know about it from hearsay. Literature has too strong an effect on
people’s minds. Like this American writer Willa Cather, who wrote a book
about the war where all the last part of it was taken from the action in
the _Birth of a Nation_, and ex-servicemen wrote to her from all over
America to tell her how much they liked it.

One of the Indians was asleep. He had been chewing tobacco, and his
mouth was pursed up in sleep. He was leaning on the other Indian’s
shoulder. The Indian who was awake pointed at the other Indian, who was
asleep, and shook his head.

“Well, how did you like the speech?” Yogi asked the Indian who was
awake.

“White chief have heap much sound ideas,” the Indian said. “White chief
educated like hell.”

“Thank you,” Yogi said. He felt touched. Here among the simple
aborigines, the only real Americans, he had found that true communion.
The Indian looked at him, holding the sleeping Indian carefully that his
head might not fall back upon the snow-covered logs.

“Was white chief in the war?” the Indian asked.

“I landed in France in May, 1917,” Yogi began.

“I thought maybe white chief was in the war from the way he talked,” the
Indian said. “Him,” he raised the head of his sleeping companion up so
the last rays of the sunset shone on the sleeping Indian’s face, “he got
V.C. Me I got D.S.O. and M.C. with bar. I was major in the Fourth
C.M.R.’s.”

“I’m glad to meet you,” Yogi said. He felt strangely humiliated. It was
growing dark. There was a single line of sunset where the sky and the
water met ’way out on Lake Michigan. Yogi watched the narrow line of the
sunset grow darker red, thin to a mere slit, and then fade. The sun was
down behind the lake. Yogi stood up from the pile of logs. The Indian
stood up too. He awakened his companion, and the Indian who had been
sleeping stood up and looked at Yogi Johnson.

“We go to Petoskey to join Salvation Army,” the larger and more wakeful
Indian said.

“White chief come too,” said the smaller Indian, who had been asleep.

“I’ll walk in with you,” Yogi replied. Who were these Indians? What did
they mean to him?

With the sun down, the slushy road was stiffening. It was freezing
again. After all, maybe spring was not coming. Maybe it did not make a
difference that he did not want a woman. Now that the spring was perhaps
not coming there was a question about that. He would walk into town with
the Indians and look for a beautiful woman and try and want her. He
turned down the now frozen road. The two Indians walked by his side.
They were all bound in the same direction.


                             CHAPTER TWELVE

Through the night down the frozen road the three walked into Petoskey.
They had been silent walking along the frozen road. Their shoes broke
the new-formed crusts of ice. Sometimes Yogi Johnson stepped through a
thin film of ice into a pool of water. The Indians avoided the pools of
water.

They came down the hill past the feed store, crossed the bridge over the
Bear River, their boots ringing hollowly on the frozen planks of the
bridge, and climbed the hill that led past Dr. Rumsey’s house and the
Home Tea-Room up to the pool-room. In front of the pool-room the two
Indians stopped.

“White chief shoot pool?” the big Indian asked.

“No,” Yogi Johnson said. “My right arm was crippled in the war.”

“White chief have hard luck,” the small Indian said. “Shoot one game
Kelly pool.”

“He got both arms and both legs shot off at Ypres,” the big Indian said
in an aside to Yogi. “Him very sensitive.”

“All right,” Yogi Johnson said. “I’ll shoot one game.”

They went into the hot, smoke-filled warmth of the pool-room. They
obtained a table and took down cues from the wall. As the little Indian
reached up to take down his cue Yogi noticed that he had two artificial
arms. They were brown leather and were both buckled on at the elbow. On
the smooth green cloth, under the bright electric lights, they played
pool. At the end of an hour and a half, Yogi Johnson found that he owed
the little Indian four dollars and thirty cents.

“You shoot a pretty nice stick,” he remarked to the small Indian.

“Me not shoot so good since the war,” the small Indian replied.

“White chief like to drink a little?” asked the larger Indian.

“Where do you get it?” asked Yogi. “I have to go to Cheboygan for mine.”

“White chief come with red brothers,” the big Indian said.

They left the pool-table, placed their cues in the rack on the wall,
paid at the counter, and went out into the night.

Along the dark streets men were sneaking home. The frost had come and
frozen everything stiff and cold. The chinook had not been a real
chinook, after all. Spring had not yet come, and the men who had
commenced their orgies were halted by the chill in the air that told
them the chinook wind had been a fake. That foreman, Yogi thought, he’ll
catch hell tomorrow. Perhaps it had all been engineered by the
pump-manufacturers to get the foreman out of his job. Such things were
done. Through the dark of the night men were sneaking home in little
groups.

The two Indians walked on either side of Yogi. They turned down a side
street, and all three halted before a building that looked something
like a stable. It was a stable. The two Indians opened the door and Yogi
followed them inside. A ladder led upstairs to the floor above. It was
dark inside the stable, but one of the Indians lit a match to show Yogi
the ladder. The little Indian climbed up first, the metal hinges of his
artificial limbs squeaking as he climbed. Yogi followed him, and the
other Indian climbed last, lighting Yogi’s way with matches. The little
Indian knocked on the roof where the ladder stopped against the wall.
There was an answering knock. The little Indian knocked in answer, three
sharp knocks on the roof above his head. A trap-door in the roof was
raised, and they climbed up through into the lighted room.

In one corner of the room there was a bar with a brass rail and tall
spittoons. Behind the bar was a mirror. Easy-chairs were all around the
room. There was a pool-table. Magazines on sticks hung in a line on the
wall. There was a framed autographed portrait of Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow on the wall draped in the American flag. Several Indians were
sitting in the easy-chairs reading. A little group stood at the bar.

“Nice little club, eh?” An Indian came up and shook hands with Yogi. “I
see you almost every day at the pump-factory.”

He was a man who worked at one of the machines near Yogi in the factory.
Another Indian came up and shook hands with Yogi. He also worked in the
pump-factory.

“Rotten luck about the chinook,” he said.

“Yes,” Yogi said. “Just a false alarm.”

“Come and have a drink,” the first Indian said.

“I’m with a party,” Yogi answered. Who were these Indians, anyway?

“Bring them along too,” the first Indian said. “Always room for one
more.”

Yogi looked around him. The two Indians who had brought him were gone.
Where were they? Then he saw them. They were over at the pool-table. The
tall refined Indian to whom Yogi was talking followed his glance. He
nodded his head in understanding.

“They’re woods Indians,” he explained apologetically. “We’re most of us
town Indians here.”

“Yes, of course,” Yogi agreed.

“The little chap has a very good war record,” the tall refined Indian
remarked. “The other chap was a major too, I believe.”

Yogi was guided over to the bar by the tall refined Indian. Behind the
bar was the bartender. He was a Negro.

“How would some Dog’s Head ale go?” asked the Indian.

“Fine,” Yogi said.

“Two Dog’s Heads, Bruce,” the Indian remarked to the bartender. The
bartender broke into a chuckle.

“What are you laughing at, Bruce?” the Indian asked.

The Negro broke into a shrill haunting laugh.

“I knowed it, Massa Red Dog,” he said. “I knowed you’d ordah dat Dog’s
Head all the time.”

“He’s a merry fellow,” the Indian remarked to Yogi. “I must introduce
myself. Red Dog’s the name.”

“Johnson’s the name,” Yogi said. “Yogi Johnson.”

“Oh, we are all quite familiar with your name, Mr. Johnson,” Red Dog
smiled. “I would like you to meet my friends Mr. Sitting Bull, Mr.
Poisoned Buffalo, and Chief Running Skunk-Backwards.”

“Sitting Bull’s a name I know,” Yogi remarked, shaking hands.

“Oh, I’m not one of those Sitting Bulls,” Mr. Sitting Bull said.

“Chief Running Skunk-Backwards’s great-grandfather once sold the entire
Island of Manhattan for a few strings of wampum.” Red Dog explained.

“How very interesting,” Yogi said.

“That was a costly bit of wampum for our family.” Chief Running
Skunk-Backwards smiled ruefully.

“Chief Running Skunk-Backwards has some of that wampum. Would you like
to see it?” Red Dog asked.

“Indeed, I would.”

“It’s really no different from any other wampum,” Skunk-Backwards
explained deprecatingly. He pulled a chain of wampum out of his pocket,
and handed it to Yogi Johnson. Yogi looked at it curiously. What a part
that string of wampum had played in this America of ours.

“Would you like to have one or two wampums for a keepsake?”
Skunk-Backwards asked.

“I wouldn’t like to take your wampum,” Yogi demurred.

“They have no intrinsic value really,” Skunk-Backwards explained,
detaching one or two wampums from the string.

“Their value is really a sentimental one to Skunk-Backwards’s family,”
Red Dog said.

“It’s damned decent of you, Mr. Skunk-Backwards,” Yogi said.

“It’s nothing,” Skunk-Backwards said. “You’d do the same for me in a
moment.”

“It’s decent of you.”

Behind the bar, Bruce, the Negro bartender, had been leaning forward and
watching the wampums pass from hand to hand. His dark face shone.
Sharply, without explanation, he broke into high-pitched uncontrolled
laughter. The dark laughter of the Negro.

Red Dog looked at him sharply. “I say, Bruce,” he spoke sharply; “your
mirth is a little ill-timed.”

Bruce stopped laughing and wiped his face on a towel. He rolled his eyes
apologetically.

“Ah can’t help it, Massa Red Dog. When I seen Mistah Skunk-Backhouse
passin’ dem wampums around I jess couldn’t stand it no longa. Whad he
wan sell a big town like New Yawk foh dem wampums for? Wampums! Take
away yoah wampums!”

“Bruce is an eccentric,” Red Dog explained, “but he’s a corking
bartender and a good-hearted chap.”

“Youah right theah, Massa Red Dog,” the bartender leaned forward. “I’se
got a heart of puah gold.”

“He is an eccentric, though,” Red Dog apologized. “The house committee
are always after me to get another bartender, but I like the chap, oddly
enough.”

“I’m all right, boss,” Bruce said. “It’s just that when I see something
funny I just have to laff. You know I don’ mean no harm, boss.”

“Right enough, Bruce,” Red Dog agreed. “You are an honest chap.”

Yogi Johnson looked about the room. The other Indians had gone away from
the bar, and Skunk-Backwards was showing the wampum to a little group of
Indians in dinner dress who had just come in. At the pool-table the two
woods Indians were still playing. They had removed their coats, and the
light above the pool-table glinted on the metal joints in the little
woods Indian’s artificial arms. He had just run the table for the
eleventh consecutive time.

“That little chap would have made a pool-player if he hadn’t had a bit
of hard luck in the war,” Red Dog remarked. “Would you like to have a
look about the club?” He took the check from Bruce, signed it, and Yogi
followed him into the next room.

“Our committee room,” Red Dog said. On the walls were framed autographed
photographs of Chief Bender, Francis Parkman, D. H. Lawrence, Chief
Meyers, Stewart Edward White, Mary Austin, Jim Thorpe, General Custer,
Glenn Warner, Mabel Dodge, and a full-length oil painting of Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow.

Beyond the committee room was a locker room with a small plunge bath or
swimming-pool. “It’s really ridiculously small for a club,” Red Dog
said. “But it makes a comfortable little hole to pop into when the
evenings are dull.” He smiled. “We call it the wigwam, you know. That’s
a little conceit of my own.”

“It’s a damned nice club,” Yogi said enthusiastically.

“Put you up if you like,” Red Dog offered. “What’s your tribe?”

“What do you mean?”

“Your tribe. What are you—Sac and Fox? Jibway? Cree, I imagine.”

“Oh,” said Yogi. “My parents came from Sweden.”

Red Dog looked at him closely. His eyes narrowed.

“You’re not having me on?”

“No. They either came from Sweden or Norway,” Yogi said.

“I’d have sworn you looked a bit on the white side,” Red Dog said.
“Damned good thing this came out in time. There’d have been no end of
scandal.” He put his hand to his head and pursed his lips. “Here, you,”
he turned suddenly and gripped Yogi by the vest. Yogi felt the barrel of
an automatic pushed hard against his stomach. “You’ll go quietly through
the club-room, get your coat and hat and leave as though nothing had
happened. Say polite good-by to anyone who happens to speak to you. And
never come back. Get that, you Swede.”

“Yes,” said Yogi. “Put up your gun. I’m not afraid of your gun.”

“Do as I say,” Red Dog ordered. “As for those two pool-players that
brought you here, I’ll soon have them out of this.”

Yogi went into the bright room, looked at the bar, where Bruce, the
bartender, was regarding him, got his hat and coat, said good-night to
Skunk-Backwards, who asked him why he was leaving so early, and the
outside trap-door was swung up by Bruce. As Yogi started down the ladder
the Negro burst out laughing. “I knowed it,” he laughed. “I knowed it
all de time. No Swede gwine to fool ole Bruce.”

Yogi looked back and saw the laughing black face of the Negro framed in
the oblong square of light that came through the raised trap-door. Once
on the stable floor, Yogi looked around him. He was alone. The straw of
the old stable was stiff and frozen under his feet. Where had he been?
Had he been in an Indian club? What was it all about? Was this the end?

Above him a slit of light came in the roof. Then it was blocked by two
black figures, there was the sound of a kick, a blow, a series of thuds,
some dull, some sharp, and two human forms came crashing down the
ladder. From above floated the dark, haunting sound of black Negro
laughter.

The two woods Indians picked themselves up from the straw and limped
toward the door. One of them, the little one, was crying. Yogi followed
them out into the cold night. It was cold. The night was clear. The
stars were out.

“Club no damn good,” the big Indian said. “Club heap no damn good.”

The little Indian was crying. Yogi, in the starlight, saw that he had
lost one of his artificial arms.

“Me no play pool no more,” the little Indian sobbed. He shook his one
arm at the window of the club, from which a thin slit of light came.
“Club heap goddam hell no good.”

“Never mind,” Yogi said. “I’ll get you a job in the pump-factory.”

“Pump-factory, hell,” the big Indian said. “We all go join Salvation
Army.”

“Don’t cry,” Yogi said to the little Indian. “I’ll buy you a new arm.”

The little Indian went on crying. He sat down in the snowy road. “No can
play pool me no care about nothing,” he said.

From above them, out of the window of the club came the haunting sound
of a Negro laughing.

AUTHOR’S NOTE TO THE READER

In case it may have any historical value, I am glad to state that I
wrote the foregoing chapter in two hours directly on the typewriter, and
then went out to lunch with John Dos Passos, whom I consider a very
forceful writer, and an exceedingly pleasant fellow besides. This is
what is known in the provinces as log-rolling. We lunched on rollmops,
Sole Meunière, Civet de Lièvre à la Chez Cocotte, marmelade de pommes,
and washed it all down, as we used to say (eh, reader?) with a bottle of
Montrachet 1919, with the sole, and a bottle of Hospice de Beaune 1919
apiece with the jugged hare. Mr. Dos Passos, I believe, shared a bottle
of Chambertin with me over the marmelade de pommes (Eng., apple sauce).
We drank two vieux marcs, and after deciding not to go to the Café du
Dôme and talk about Art we both went to our respective homes and I wrote
the following chapter. I would like the reader to particularly remark
the way the complicated threads of the lives of the various characters
in the book are gathered together, and then held there in that memorable
scene in the beanery. It was when I read this chapter aloud to him that
Mr. Dos Passos exclaimed, “Hemingway, you have wrought a masterpiece.”

P. S.—FROM THE AUTHOR TO THE READER

It is at this point, reader, that I am going to try and get that sweep
and movement into the book that shows that the book is really a great
book. I know you hope just as much as I do, reader, that I will get this
sweep and movement because think what it will mean to both of us. Mr. H.
G. Wells, who has been visiting at our home (we’re getting along in the
literary game, eh, reader?) asked us the other day if perhaps our
reader, that’s you, reader—just think of it, H. G. Wells talking about
you right in our home. Anyway, H. G. Wells asked us if perhaps our
reader would not think too much of this story was autobiographical.
Please, reader, just get that idea out of your head. We have lived in
Petoskey, Mich., it is true, and naturally many of the characters are
drawn from life as we lived it then. But they are other people, not the
author. The author only comes into the story in these little notes. It
is true that before starting this story we spent twelve years studying
the various Indian dialects of the North, and there is still preserved
in the museum at Cross Village our translation of the New Testament into
Ojibway. But you would have done the same thing in our place, reader,
and I think if you think it over you will agree with us on this. Now to
get back to the story. It is meant in the best spirit of friendship when
I say that you have no idea, reader, what a hard chapter this is going
to be to write. As a matter of fact, and I try to be frank about these
things, we will not even try and write it until tomorrow.




                                PART FOUR
                            The Passing of
                           a Great Race and
                        the Making and Marring
                              of Americans


    _But perhaps it may be objected to me, that I have against my
    own rules introduced vices, and of a very black kind, into this
    work. To which I shall answer: first, that it is very difficult
    to pursue a series of human actions, and keep clear from them.
    Secondly, that the vices to be found here are rather the
    accidental consequences of some human frailty or foible, than
    causes habitually existing in the mind. Thirdly, that they are
    never set forth as the objects of ridicule, but detestation.
    Fourthly, that they are never the principal figure at that time
    on the scene: and lastly, they never produce the intended evil._

                                                      HENRY FIELDING


                            CHAPTER THIRTEEN

Yogi Johnson walking down the silent street with his arm around the
little Indian’s shoulder. The big Indian walking along beside them. The
cold night. The shuttered houses of the town. The little Indian, who has
lost his artificial arm. The big Indian, who was also in the war. Yogi
Johnson, who was in the war too. The three of them walking, walking,
walking. Where were they going? Where could they go? What was there
left?

Suddenly under a street light that swung on its drooping wire above a
street corner, casting its light down on the snow, the big Indian
stopped. “Walking no get us nowhere,” he grunted. “Walking no good. Let
white chief speak. Where we go, white chief?”

Yogi Johnson did not know. Obviously, walking was not the solution of
their problem. Walking was all right in its way. Coxey’s Army. A horde
of men, seeking work, pressing on toward Washington. Marching men, Yogi
thought. Marching on and on and where were they getting? Nowhere. Yogi
knew it only too well. Nowhere. No damn where at all.

“White chief speak up,” the big Indian said.

“I don’t know,” Yogi said. “I don’t know at all.” Was this what they had
fought the war for? Was this what it was all about? It looked like it.
Yogi standing under the street light. Yogi thinking and wondering. The
two Indians in their mackinaw coats. One of the Indians with an empty
sleeve. All of them wondering.

“White chief no speak?” the big Indian asked.

“No.” What could Yogi say? What was there to say?

“Red brother speak?” asked the Indian.

“Speak out,” Yogi said. He looked down at the snow. “One man’s as good
as another now.”

“White chief ever go to Brown’s Beanery?” asked the big Indian, looking
into Yogi’s face under the arc light.

“No.” Yogi felt all in. Was this the end? A beanery. Well, a beanery as
well as any other place. But a beanery. Well, why not? These Indians
knew the town. They were ex-service men. They both had splendid war
records. He knew that himself. But a beanery.

“White chief come with red brothers.” The tall Indian put his arm under
Yogi’s arm. The little Indian fell into step. “Forward to the beanery.”
Yogi spoke quietly. He was a white man, but he knew when he had enough.
After all, the white race might not always be supreme. This Moslem
revolt. Unrest in the East. Trouble in the West. Things looked black in
the South. Now this condition of things in the North. Where was it
taking him? Where did it all lead? Would it help him to want a woman?
Would spring ever come? Was it worth while after all? He wondered.

The three of them striding along the frozen streets of Petoskey. Going
somewhere now. En route. Huysmans wrote that. It would be interesting to
read French. He must try it sometime. There was a street in Paris named
after Huysmans. Right around the corner from where Gertrude Stein lived.
Ah, there was a woman! Where were her experiments in words leading her?
What was at the bottom of it? All that in Paris. Ah, Paris. How far it
was to Paris now. Paris in the morning. Paris in the evening. Paris at
night. Paris in the morning again. Paris at noon, perhaps. Why not? Yogi
Johnson striding on. His mind never still.

All three of them striding on together. The arms of those that had arms
linked through each other’s arms. Red men and white men walking
together. Something had brought them together. Was it the war? Was it
fate? Was it accident? Or was it just chance? These questions struggled
with each other in Yogi Johnson’s brain. His brain was tired. He had
been thinking too much lately. On still they strode. Then, abruptly,
they stopped.

The little Indian looked up at the sign. It shone in the night outside
the frosted windows of the beanery. =Best by Test.=

“Makeum heap big test,” the little Indian grunted.

“White man’s beanery got heap fine T-bone steak,” the tall Indian
grunted. “Take it from red brother.” The Indians stood a little
uncertainly outside the door. The tall Indian turned to Yogi. “White
chief got dollars?”

“Yes, I’ve got money,” Yogi answered. He was prepared to go the route.
It was no time to turn back now. “The feed’s on me, boys.”

“White chief nature’s nobleman,” the tall Indian grunted.

“White chief rough diamond,” the little Indian agreed.

“You’d do the same for me,” Yogi deprecated. After all, perhaps it was
true. It was a chance he was taking. He had taken a chance in Paris
once. Steve Brodie had taken a chance. Or so they said. Chances were
taken all over the world every day. In China, Chinamen were taking
chances. In Africa, Africans. In Egypt, Egyptians. In Poland, Poles. In
Russia, Russians. In Ireland, Irish. In Armenia——

“Armenians no take chances,” the tall Indian grunted quietly. He had
voiced Yogi’s unspoken doubt. They were a canny folk these red men.

“Not even in the rug game?”

“Red brother think not,” the Indian said. His tones carried conviction
to Yogi. Who were these Indians? There was something back of all this.
They went into the beanery.

AUTHOR’S NOTE TO READER

It was at this point in the story, reader, that Mr. F. Scott Fitzgerald
came to our home one afternoon, and after remaining for quite a while
suddenly sat down in the fireplace and would not (or was it could not,
reader?) get up and let the fire burn something else so as to keep the
room warm. I know, reader, that these things sometimes do not show in a
story, but, just the same, they are happening, and think what they mean
to chaps like you and me in the literary game. If you should think this
part of the story is not as good as it might have been remember, reader,
that day in and day out all over the world things like this are
happening. Need I add, reader, that I have the utmost respect for Mr.
Fitzgerald, and let anybody else attack him and I would be the first to
spring to his defense! And that includes you too, reader, though I hate
to speak out bluntly like this, and take the risk of breaking up a
friendship of the sort that ours has gotten to be.

P. S.—TO THE READER

As I read that chapter over, reader, it doesn’t seem so bad. You may
like it. I hope you will. And if you do like it, reader, and the rest of
the book as well, will you tell your friends about it, and try and get
them to buy the book just as you have done? I only get twenty cents on
each book that is sold, and while twenty cents is not much nowadays
still it will mount up to a lot if two or three hundred thousand copies
of the book are sold. They will be, too, if every one likes the book as
much as you and I do, reader. And listen, reader. I meant it when I said
I would be glad to read anything you wrote. That wasn’t just talk. Bring
it along and we will go over it together. If you like, I’ll re-write
bits of it for you. I don’t mean that in any critical sort of way
either. If there is anything you do not like in this book just write to
Mr. Scribner’s Sons at the home office. They’ll change it for you. Or,
if you would rather, I will change it myself. You know what I think of
you, reader. And you’re not angry or upset about what I said about Scott
Fitzgerald either, are you? I hope not. Now I am going to write the next
chapter. Mr. Fitzgerald is gone and Mr. Dos Passos had gone to England,
and I think I can promise you that it will be a bully chapter. At least,
it will be just as good as I can write it. We both know how good that
can be, if we read the blurbs, eh, reader?


                            CHAPTER FOURTEEN

Inside the beanery. They are all inside the beanery. Some do not see the
others. Each are intent on themselves. Red men are intent on red men.
White men are intent on white men or on white women. There are no red
women. Are there no squaws any more? What has become of the squaws? Have
we lost our squaws in America? Silently, through the door which she had
opened, a squaw came into the room. She was clad only in a pair of worn
moccasins. On her back was a papoose. Beside her walked a husky dog.

“Don’t look!” the drummer shouted to the women at the counter.

“Here! Get her out of here!” the owner of the beanery shouted. The squaw
was forcibly ejected by the Negro cook. They heard her thrashing around
in the snow outside. Her husky dog was barking.

“My God! What that might have led to!” Scripps O’Neil mopped his
forehead with a napkin.

The Indians had watched with impassive faces. Yogi Johnson had been
unable to move. The waitresses had covered their faces with napkins or
whatever was handy. Mrs. Scripps had covered her eyes with _The American
Mercury_. Scripps O’Neil was feeling faint and shaken. Something had
stirred inside him, some vague primordial feeling, as the squaw had come
into the room.

“Wonder where that squaw came from?” the drummer asked.

“Her my squaw,” the little Indian said.

“Good God, man! Can’t you clothe her?” Scripps O’Neil said in a dumb
voice. There was a note of terror in his words.

“Her no like clothes,” the little Indian explained. “Her woods Indian.”

Yogi Johnson was not listening. Something had broken inside of him.
Something had snapped as the squaw came into the room. He had a new
feeling. A feeling he thought had been lost for ever. Lost for always.
Lost. Gone permanently. He knew now it was a mistake. He was all right
now. By the merest chance he had found it out. What might he not have
thought if that squaw had never come into the beanery? What black
thoughts he had been thinking! He had been on the verge of suicide.
Self-destruction. Killing himself. Here in this beanery. What a mistake
that would have been. He knew now. What a botch he might have made of
life. Killing himself. Let spring come now. Let it come. It couldn’t
come fast enough. Let spring come. He was ready for it.

“Listen,” he said to the two Indians. “I want to tell you about
something that happened to me in Paris.”

The two Indians leaned forward. “White chief got the floor,” the tall
Indian remarked.

“What I thought was a very beautiful thing happened to me in Paris,”
Yogi began. “You Indians know Paris? Good. Well, it turned out to be the
ugliest thing that ever happened to me.”

The Indians grunted. They knew their Paris.

“It was the first day of my leave. I was walking along the Boulevard
Malesherbes. A car passed me and a beautiful woman leaned out. She
called to me and I came. She took me to a house, a mansion rather, in a
distant part of Paris, and there a very beautiful thing happened to me.
Afterward someone took me out a different door than I had come in by.
The beautiful woman had told me that she would never, that she could
never, see me again. I tried to get the number of the mansion but it was
one of a block of mansions all looking the same.

“From then on all through my leave I tried to see that beautiful lady.
Once I thought I saw her in the theatre. It wasn’t her. Another time I
caught a glimpse of what I thought was her in a passing taxi and leaped
into another taxi and followed. I lost the taxi. I was desperate.
Finally on the next to the last night of my leave I was so desperate and
dull that I went with one of those guides that guarantee to show you all
of Paris. We started out and visited various places. ‘Is this all you’ve
got?’ I asked the guide.

“‘There is a real place, but it’s very expensive,’ the guide said. We
compromised on a price finally, and the guide took me. It was in an old
mansion. You looked through a slit in the wall. All around the wall were
people looking through slits. There, looking through slits could be seen
the uniforms of men of all the Allied countries, and many handsome South
Americans in evening dress. I looked through a slit myself. For a while
nothing happened. Then a beautiful woman came into the room with a young
British officer. She took off her long fur coat and her hat and threw
them into a chair. The officer was taking off his Sam Browne belt. I
recognized her. It was the lady whom I had been with when the beautiful
thing happened to me.” Yogi Johnson looked at his empty plate of beans.
“Since then,” he said, “I have never wanted a woman. How I have suffered
I cannot tell. But I’ve suffered, boys, I’ve suffered. I blamed it on
the war. I blamed it on France. I blamed it on the decay of morality in
general. I blamed it on the younger generation. I blamed it here. I
blamed it there. Now I am cured. Here’s five dollars for you, boys.” His
eyes were shining. “Get some more to eat. Take a trip somewhere. This is
the happiest day of my life.”

He stood up from his stool before the counter, shook the one Indian
impulsively by the hand, rested his hand for a minute on the other
Indian’s shoulder, opened the door of the beanery, and strode out into
the night.

The two Indians looked at one another. “White chief heap nice fella,”
observed the big Indian.

“Think him was in the war?” asked the little Indian.

“Me wonder,” the big Indian said.

“White chief said he buy me new artificial arm,” the little Indian
grumbled.

“Maybe you get more than that,” the big Indian said.

“Me wonder,” the little Indian said. They went on eating.

At the other end of the counter of the beanery a marriage was coming to
an end.

Scripps O’Neil and his wife sat side by side. Mrs. Scripps knew now. She
couldn’t hold him. She had tried and failed. She had lost. She knew it
was a losing game. There was no holding him now. Mandy was talking
again. Talking. Talking. Always talking. That interminable stream of
literary gossip that was bringing her, Diana’s, marriage to an end. She
couldn’t hold him. He was going. Going. Going away from her. Diana
sitting there in misery. Scripps listening to Mandy talking. Mandy
talking. Talking. Talking. The drummer, an old friend now, the drummer,
sitting reading his Detroit _News_. She couldn’t hold him. She couldn’t
hold him. She couldn’t hold him.

The little Indian got up from his stool at the beanery counter, and went
over to the window. The glass on the window was covered with thick rimy
frost. The little Indian breathed on the frozen windowpane, rubbed the
spot bare with the empty sleeve of his mackinaw coat and looked out into
the night. Suddenly he turned from the window and rushed out into the
night. The tall Indian watched him go, leisurely finished his meal, took
a toothpick, placed it between his teeth, and then he too followed his
friend out into the night.


                            CHAPTER FIFTEEN

They were alone in the beanery now. Scripps and Mandy and Diana. Only
the drummer was with them. He was an old friend now. But his nerves were
on edge tonight. He folded his paper abruptly and started for the door.

“See you all later,” he said. He went out into the night. It seemed the
only thing to do. He did it.

Only three of them in the beanery now. Scripps and Mandy and Diana. Only
those three. Mandy was talking. Leaning on the counter and talking.
Scripps with his eyes fixed on Mandy. Diana made no pretense of
listening now. She knew it was over. It was all over now. But she would
make one more attempt. One more last gallant try. Perhaps she still
could hold him. Perhaps it had all been just a dream. She steadied her
voice and then she spoke.

“Scripps, dear,” she said. Her voice shook a little. She steadied it.

“What’s on your mind?” Scripps asked abruptly. Ah, there it was. That
horrid clipped speech again.

“Scripps, dear, wouldn’t you like to come home?” Diana’s voice quavered.
“There’s a new _Mercury_.” She had changed from the London _Mercury_ to
_The American Mercury_ just to please Scripps. “It just came. I wish you
felt like coming home, Scripps, there’s a splendid thing in this
_Mercury_. Do come home, Scripps, I’ve never asked anything of you
before. Come home, Scripps! Oh, won’t you come home?”

Scripps looked up. Diana’s heart beat faster. Perhaps he was coming.
Perhaps she was holding him. Holding him. Holding him.

“Do come, Scripps, dear,” Diana said softly. “There’s a wonderful
editorial in it by Mencken about chiropractors.”

Scripps looked away.

“Won’t you come, Scripps?” Diana pleaded.

“No,” Scripps said. “I don’t give a damn about Mencken any more.”

Diana dropped her head. “Oh, Scripps,” she said. “Oh, Scripps.” This was
the end. She had her answer now. She had lost him. Lost him. Lost him.
It was over. Finished. Done for. She sat crying silently. Mandy was
talking again.

Suddenly Diana straightened up. She had one last request to make. One
thing she would ask him. Only one. He might refuse her. He might not
grant it. But she would ask him.

“Scripps,” she said.

“What’s the trouble?” Scripps turned in irritation. Perhaps, after all,
he was sorry for her. He wondered.

“Can I take the bird, Scripps?” Diana’s voice broke.

“Sure,” said Scripps. “Why not?”

Diana picked up the bird-cage. The bird was asleep. Perched on one leg
as on that night when they had first met. What was it he was like? Ah,
yes. Like an old osprey. An old, old osprey from her own Lake Country.
She held the cage to her tightly.

“Thank you, Scripps,” she said. “Thank you for this bird.” Her voice
broke. “And now I must be going.”

Quietly, silently, gathering her shawl around her, clutching the cage
with the sleeping bird and the copy of _The Mercury_ to her breast, with
only a backward glance, a last glance at him who had been her Scripps,
she opened the door of the beanery, and went out into the night. Scripps
did not even see her go. He was intent on what Mandy was saying. Mandy
was talking again.

“That bird she just took out,” Mandy was saying.

“Oh, did she take a bird out?” Scripps asked. “Go on with the story.”

“You used to wonder about what sort of bird that was,” Mandy went on.

“That’s right,” Scripps agreed.

“Well that reminds me of a story about Gosse and the Marquis of Buque,”
Mandy went on.

“Tell it, Mandy. Tell it,” Scripps urged.

“It seems a great friend of mine, Ford, you’ve heard me speak of him
before, was in the marquis’s castle during the war. His regiment was
billeted there and the marquis, one of the richest if not the richest
man in England, was serving in Ford’s regiment as a private. Ford was
sitting in the library one evening. The library was a most extraordinary
place. The walls were made of bricks of gold set into tiles or
something. I forget exactly how it was.”

“Go on,” Scripps urged. “It doesn’t matter.”

“Anyhow, in the middle of the wall of the library was a stuffed flamingo
in a glass case.”

“They understand interior decorating, these English,” Scripps said.

“Your wife was English, wasn’t she?” asked Mandy.

“From the Lake Country,” Scripps answered. “Go on with the story.”

“Well, anyway,” Mandy went on, “Ford was sitting there in the library
one evening after mess when the butler came in and said: ‘The Marquis of
Buque’s compliments and might he show the library to a group of friends
with whom he has been dining?’ They used to let him dine out and
sometimes they let him sleep in the castle. Ford said, ‘Quite,’ and in
came the marquis in his private’s uniform followed by Sir Edmund Gosse
and Professor Whatsisname, I forget it for the moment, from Oxford.
Gosse stopped in front of the stuffed flamingo in the glass case and
said, ‘What have we here, Buque?’

“‘It’s a flamingo, Sir Edmund,’ the marquis answered.

“‘That’s not my idea of a flamingo,’ Gosse remarked.

“‘No, Gosse. That’s God’s idea of a flamingo,’ Professor Whatsisname
said. I wish I could remember his name.”

“Don’t bother,” Scripps said. His eyes were bright. He leaned forward.
Something was pounding inside of him. Something he could not control. “I
love you, Mandy,” he said. “I love you. You are my woman.” The thing was
pounding away inside of him. It would not stop.

“That’s all right,” Mandy answered. “I’ve known you were my man for a
long time. Would you like to hear another story? Speaking of woman.”

“Go on,” Scripps said. “You must never stop, Mandy. You are my woman
now.”

“Sure,” Mandy agreed. “This story is about when Knut Hamsun was a
streetcar conductor in Chicago.”

“Go on,” Scripps said. “You are my woman now, Mandy.”

He repeated the phrase to himself. My woman. My woman. You are my woman.
She is my woman. It is my woman. My woman. But, somehow, he was not
satisfied. Somewhere, somehow, there must be something else. Something
else. My woman. The words were a little hollow now. Into his mind,
though he tried to thrust it out, there came again the monstrous picture
of the squaw as she strode silently into the room. That squaw. She did
not wear clothes, because she did not like them. Hardy, braving the
winter nights. What might not the spring bring? Mandy was talking. Mandy
talking on in the beanery. Mandy telling her stories. It grows late in
the beanery. Mandy talks on. She is his woman now. He is her man. But is
he her man? In Scripps’s brain that vision of the squaw. The squaw that
strode unannounced into the beanery. The squaw who had been thrown out
into the snow. Mandy talking on. Telling literary reminiscences.
Authentic incidents. They had the ring of truth. But were they enough?
Scripps wondered. She was his woman. But for how long? Scripps wondered.
Mandy talking on in the beanery. Scripps listening. But his mind
straying away. Straying away. Straying away. Where was it straying? Out
into the night. Out into the night.


                            CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Night in Petoskey. Long past midnight. Inside the beanery a light
burning. The town asleep under the Northern moon. To the North the
tracks of the G. R. & I. Railroad running far into the North. Cold
tracks, stretching North toward Mackinaw City and St. Ignace. Cold
tracks to be walking on at this time of night.

North of the frozen little Northern town a couple walking side by side
on the tracks. It is Yogi Johnson walking with the squaw. As they walk
Yogi Johnson silently strips off his garments. One by one he strips off
his garments, and casts them beside the track. In the end he is clad
only in a worn pair of pump-maker shoes. Yogi Johnson, naked in the
moonlight, walking North beside the squaw. The squaw striding along
beside him. She carries the papoose on her back in his bark cradle. Yogi
attempts to take the papoose from her. He would carry the papoose. The
husky dog whines and licks at Yogi Johnson’s ankles. No, the squaw would
carry the papoose herself. On they stride. Into the North. Into the
Northern night.

Behind them come two figures. Sharply etched in the moonlight. It is the
two Indians. The two woods Indians. They stoop and gather up the
garments Yogi Johnson has cast away. Occasionally, they grunt to one
another. Striding softly along in the moonlight. Their keen eyes not
missing a single cast-off garment. When the last garment has been cast
off they look and see far ahead of them the two figures in the
moonlight. The two Indians straighten up. They examine the garments.

“White chief snappy dresser,” the tall Indian remarks, holding up an
initialled shirt.

“White chief going get pretty cold,” small Indian remarks. He hands a
vest to the tall Indian. The tall Indian rolls all the clothing, all the
cast-off garments, into a bundle, and they start back along the tracks
to the town.

“Better keep clothes for white chief or sellem Salvation Army?” asks the
short Indian.

“Better sellem Salvation Army,” the tall Indian grunts. “White chief
maybe never come back.”

“White chief come back all right,” grunted the little Indian.

“Better sellem Salvation Army, anyway,” grunts the tall Indian. “White
chief need new clothes, anyhow, when spring comes.”

As they walked down the tracks toward town, the air seemed to soften.
The Indians walk uneasily now. Through the tamaracks and cedars beside
the railway tracks a warm wind is blowing. The snow-drifts are melting
now beside the tracks. Something stirs inside the two Indians. Some
urge. Some strange pagan disturbance. The warm wind is blowing. The tall
Indian stops, moistens his finger and holds it up in the air. The little
Indian watches. “Chinook?” he asks.

“Heap chinook,” the tall Indian says. They hurry on toward town. The
moon is blurred now by clouds carried by the warm chinook wind that is
blowing.

“Want to get in town before rush,” the tall Indian grunts.

“Red brothers want be well up in line,” the little Indian grunts
anxiously.

“Nobody work in factory now,” the tall Indian grunted.

“Better hurry.”

The warm wind blows. Inside the Indians strange longings were stirring.
They knew what they wanted. Spring at last was coming to the frozen
little Northern town. The two Indians hurried along the track.

                                THE END




                     AUTHOR’S FINAL NOTE TO THE READER


Well, reader, how did you like it? It took me ten days to write it. Has
it been worth it? There is just one place I would like to clear up. You
remember back in the story where the elderly waitress, Diana, tells
about how she lost her mother in Paris, and woke up to find herself with
a French general in the next room? I thought perhaps you might be
interested to know the real explanation of that. What actually happened
was that her mother was taken violently ill with the bubonic plague in
the night, and the doctor who was called diagnosed the case and warned
the authorities. It was the day the great exposition was to be opened,
and think what a case of bubonic plague would have done for the
exposition as publicity. So the French authorities simply had the woman
disappear. She died toward morning. The general who was summoned and who
then got into bed in the same room where the mother had been, always
seemed to us like a pretty brave man. He was one of the big stockholders
in the exposition, though, I believe. Anyway, reader, as a piece of
secret history it always seemed to me like an awfully good story, and I
know you would rather have me explain it here than drag an explanation
into the novel, where really, after all, it has no place. It is
interesting to observe, though, how the French police hushed the whole
matter up, and how quickly they got ahold of the coiffeur and the
cab-driver. Of course, what it shows is that when you’re travelling
abroad alone, or even with your mother, you simply cannot be too
careful. I hope it is all right about bringing this in here, but I just
felt I owed it to you, reader, to give some explanation. I do not
believe in these protracted good-bys any more than I do in long
engagements, so I will just say a simple farewell and Godspeed, reader,
and leave you now to your own devices.

                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES

    Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected. Where
    multiple spellings occur, majority use has been employed.

    Punctuation has been maintained except where obvious printer
    errors occur.

[The end of _The Torrents of Spring_ by Ernest Hemingway]


                            AFTER THE STORM


It wasn’t about anything, something about making punch, and then we
started fighting and I slipped and he had me down kneeling on my chest
and choking me with both hands like he was trying to kill me and all the
time I was trying to get the knife out of my pocket to cut him loose.
Everybody was too drunk to pull him off me. He was choking me and
hammering my head on the floor and I got the knife out and opened it up;
and I cut the muscle right across his arm and he let go of me. He
couldn’t have held on if he wanted to. Then he rolled and hung onto that
arm and started to cry and I said:

“What the hell you want to choke me for?”

I’d have killed him. I couldn’t swallow for a week. He hurt my throat
bad.

Well, I went out of there and there were plenty of them with him and
some come out after me and I made a turn and was down by the docks and I
met a fellow and he said somebody killed a man up the street. I said
“Who killed him?” and he said “I don’t know who killed him but he’s dead
all right,” and it was dark and there was water standing in the street
and no lights and windows broke and boats all up in the town and trees
blown down and everything all blown and I got a skiff and went out and
found my boat where I had her inside of Mango Key and she was all right
only she was full of water. So I bailed her out and pumped her out and
there was a moon but plenty of clouds and still plenty rough and I took
it down along; and when it was daylight I was off Eastern Harbor.

Brother, that was some storm. I was the first boat out and you never saw
water like that was. It was just as white as a lye barrel and coming
from Eastern Harbor to Sou’west Key you couldn’t recognize the shore.
There was a big channel blown right out through the middle of the beach.
Trees and all blown out and a channel cut through and all the water
white as chalk and everything on it; branches and whole trees and dead
birds, and all floating. Inside the keys were all the pelicans in the
world and all kinds of birds flying. They must have gone inside there
when they knew it was coming.

I lay at Sou’west Key a day and nobody came after me. I was the first
boat out and I seen a spar floating and I knew there must be a wreck and
I started out to look for her. I found her. She was a three-masted
schooner and I could just see the stumps of her spars out of water. She
was in too deep water and I didn’t get anything off of her. So I went on
looking for something else. I had the start on all of them and I knew I
ought to get whatever there was. I went on down over the sand-bars from
where I left that three-masted schooner and I didn’t find anything and I
went on a long way. I was way out toward the quicksands and I didn’t
find anything so I went on. Then when I was in sight of the Rebecca
Light I saw all kinds of birds making over something and I headed over
for them to see what it was and there was a cloud of birds all right.

I could see something looked like a spar up out of water and when I got
over close the birds all went up in the air and stayed all around me.
The water was clear out there and there was a spar of some kind sticking
out just above the water and when I come up close to it I saw it was all
dark under water like a long shadow and I came right over it and there
under water was a liner; just lying there all under water as big as the
whole world. I drifted over her in the boat. She lay on her side and the
stern was deep down. The port holes were all shut tight and I could see
the glass shine in the water and the whole of her; the biggest boat I
ever saw in my life laying there and I went along the whole length of
her and then I went over and anchored and I had the skiff on the deck
forward and I shoved it down into the water and sculled over with the
birds all around me.

I had a water glass like we use sponging and my hand shook so I could
hardly hold it. All the port holes were shut that you could see going
along over her but way down below near the bottom something must have
been open because there were pieces of things floating out all the time.
You couldn’t tell what they were. Just pieces. That’s what the birds
were after. You never saw so many birds. They were all around me; crazy
yelling.

I could see everything sharp and clear. I could see her rounded over and
she looked a mile long under the water. She was lying on a clear white
bank of sand and the spar was a sort of foremast or some sort of tackle
that slanted out of water the way she was laying on her side. Her bow
wasn’t very far under. I could stand on the letters of her name on her
bow and my head was just out of water. But the nearest port hole was
twelve feet down. I could just reach it with the grains pole and I tried
to break it with that but I couldn’t. The glass was too stout. So I
sculled back to the boat and got a wrench and lashed it to the end of
the grains pole and I couldn’t break it. There I was looking down
through the glass at that liner with everything in her and I was the
first one to her and I couldn’t get into her. She must have had five
million dollars worth in her.

It made me shaky to think how much she must have in her. Inside the port
hole that was closest I could see something but I couldn’t make it out
through the water glass. I couldn’t do any good with the grains pole and
I took off my clothes and stood and took a couple of deep breaths and
dove over off the stern with the wrench in my hand and swam down. I
could hold on for a second to the edge of the port hole and I could see
in and there was a woman inside with her hair floating all out. I could
see her floating plain and I hit the glass twice with the wrench hard
and I heard the noise clink in my ears but it wouldn’t break and I had
to come up.

I hung onto the dinghy and got my breath and then I climbed in and took
a couple of breaths and dove again. I swam down and took hold of the
edge of the port hole with my fingers and held it and hit the glass as
hard as I could with the wrench. I could see the woman floated in the
water through the glass. Her hair was tied once close to her head and it
floated all out in the water. I could see the rings on one of her hands.
She was right up close to the port hole and I hit the glass twice and I
didn’t even crack it. When I came up I thought I wouldn’t make it to the
top before I’d have to breathe.

I went down once more and I cracked the glass, only cracked it, and when
I came up my nose was bleeding and I stood on the bow of the liner with
my bare feet on the letters of her name and my head just out and rested
there and then I swam over to the skiff and pulled up into it and sat
there waiting for my head to stop aching and looking down into the water
glass, but I bled so I had to wash out the water glass. Then I lay back
in the skiff and held my hand under my nose to stop it and I lay there
with my head back looking up and there was a million birds above and all
around.

When I quit bleeding I took another look through the glass and then I
sculled over to the boat to try and find something heavier than the
wrench but I couldn’t find a thing; not even a sponge hook. I went back
and the water was clearer all the time and you could see everything that
floated out over that white bank of sand. I looked for sharks but there
weren’t any. You could have seen a shark a long way away. The water was
so clear and the sand white. There was a grapple for an anchor on the
skiff and I cut it off and went overboard and down with it. It carried
me right down and past the port hole and I grabbed and couldn’t hold
anything and went on down and down, sliding along the curved side of
her. I had to let go of the grapple. I heard it bump once and it seemed
like a year before I came up through to the top of the water. The skiff
was floated away with the tide and I swam over to her with my nose
bleeding in the water while I swam and I was plenty glad there weren’t
sharks; but I was tired.

My head felt cracked open and I lay in the skiff and rested and then I
sculled back. It was getting along in the afternoon. I went down once
more with the wrench and it didn’t do any good. That wrench was too
light. It wasn’t any good diving unless you had a big hammer or
something heavy enough to do good. Then I lashed the wrench to the
grains pole again and I watched through the water glass and pounded on
the glass and hammered until the wrench came off and I saw it in the
glass, clear and sharp, go sliding down along her and then off and down
to the quicksand and go in. Then I couldn’t do a thing. The wrench was
gone and I’d lost the grapple so I sculled back to the boat. I was too
tired to get the skiff aboard and the sun was pretty low. The birds were
all pulling out and leaving her and I headed for Sou’west Key towing the
skiff and the birds going on ahead of me and behind me. I was plenty
tired.

That night it came on to blow and it blew for a week. You couldn’t get
out to her. They come out from town and told me the fellow I’d had to
cut was all right except for his arm and I went back to town and they
put me under five hundred dollar bond. It came out all right because
some of them, friends of mine, swore he was after me with an ax, but by
the time we got back out to her the Greeks had blown her open and
cleaned her out. They got the safe out with dynamite. Nobody ever knows
how much they got. She carried gold and they got it all. They stripped
her clean. I found her and I never got a nickel out of her.

It was a hell of a thing all right. They say she was just outside of
Havana harbor when the hurricane hit and she couldn’t get in or the
owners wouldn’t let the captain chance coming in; they say he wanted to
try; so she had to go with it and in the dark they were running with it
trying to go through the gulf between Rebecca and Tortugas when she
struck on the quicksands. Maybe her rudder was carried away. Maybe they
weren’t even steering. But anyway they couldn’t have known they were
quicksands and when she struck the captain must have ordered them to
open up the ballast tanks so she’d lay solid. But it was quicksand she’d
hit and when they opened the tanks she went in stern first and then over
on her beam ends. There were four hundred and fifty passengers and the
crew on board of her and they must all have been aboard of her when I
found her. They must have opened the tanks as soon as she struck and the
minute she settled on it the quicksands took her down. Then her boilers
must have burst and that must have been what made those pieces that came
out. It was funny there weren’t any sharks though. There wasn’t a fish.
I could have seen them on that clear white sand.

Plenty of fish now though; jewfish, the biggest kind. The biggest part
of her’s under the sand now but they live inside of her; the biggest
kind of jewfish. Some weigh three to four hundred pounds. Sometime we’ll
go out and get some. You can see the Rebecca light from where she is.
They’ve got a buoy on her now. She’s right at the end of the quicksand
right at the edge of the gulf. She only missed going through by about a
hundred yards. In the dark in the storm they just missed it; raining the
way it was they couldn’t have seen the Rebecca. Then they’re not used to
that sort of thing. The captain of a liner isn’t used to scudding that
way. They have a course and they tell me they set some sort of a compass
and it steers itself. They probably didn’t know where they were when
they ran with that blow but they come close to making it. Maybe they’d
lost the rudder though. Anyway there wasn’t another thing for them to
hit till they’d get to Mexico once they were in that gulf. Must have
been something though when they struck in that rain and wind and he told
them to open her tanks. Nobody could have been on deck in that blow and
rain. Everybody must have been below. They couldn’t have lived on deck.
There must have been some scenes inside all right because you know she
settled fast. I saw that wrench go into the sand. The captain couldn’t
have known it was quicksand when she struck unless he knew these waters.
He just knew it wasn’t rock. He must have seen it all up in the bridge.
He must have known what it was about when she settled. I wonder how fast
she made it. I wonder if the mate was there with him. Do you think they
stayed inside the bridge or do you think they took it outside? They
never found any bodies. Not a one. Nobody floating. They float a long
way with life belts too. They must have took it inside. Well, the Greeks
got it all. Everything. They must have come fast all right. They picked
her clean. First there was the birds, then me, then the Greeks, and even
the birds got more out of her than I did.




                      A CLEAN, WELL−LIGHTED PLACE


It was late and every one had left the café except an old man who sat in
the shadow the leaves of the tree made against the electric light. In
the daytime the street was dusty, but at night the dew settled the dust
and the old man liked to sit late because he was deaf and now at night
it was quiet and he felt the difference. The two waiters inside the café
knew that the old man was a little drunk, and while he was a good client
they knew that if he became too drunk he would leave without paying, so
they kept watch on him.

“Last week he tried to commit suicide,” one waiter said.

“Why?”

“He was in despair.”

“What about?”

“Nothing.”

“How do you know it was nothing?”

“He has plenty of money.”

They sat together at a table that was close against the wall near the
door of the café and looked at the terrace where the tables were all
empty except where the old man sat in the shadow of the leaves of the
tree that moved slightly in the wind. A girl and a soldier went by in
the street. The street light shone on the brass number on his collar.
The girl wore no head covering and hurried beside him.

“The guard will pick him up,” one waiter said.

“What does it matter if he gets what he’s after?”

“He had better get off the street now. The guard will get him. They went
by five minutes ago.”

The old man sitting in the shadow rapped on his saucer with his glass.
The younger waiter went over to him.

“What do you want?”

The old man looked at him. “Another brandy,” he said.

“You’ll be drunk,” the waiter said. The old man looked at him. The
waiter went away.

“He’ll stay all night,” he said to his colleague. “I’m sleepy now. I
never get into bed before three o’clock. He should have killed himself
last week.”

The waiter took the brandy bottle and another saucer from the counter
inside the café and marched out to the old man’s table. He put down the
saucer and poured the glass full of brandy.

“You should have killed yourself last week,” he said to the deaf man.
The old man motioned with his finger. “A little more,” he said. The
waiter poured on into the glass so that the brandy slopped over and ran
down the stem into the top saucer of the pile. “Thank you,” the old man
said. The waiter took the bottle back inside the café. He sat down at
the table with his colleague again.

“He’s drunk now,” he said.

“He’s drunk every night.”

“What did he want to kill himself for?”

“How should I know.”

“How did he do it?”

“He hung himself with a rope.”

“Who cut him down?”

“His niece.”

“Why did they do it?”

“Fear for his soul.”

“How much money has he got?”

“He’s got plenty.”

“He must be eighty years old.”

“Anyway I should say he was eighty.”

“I wish he would go home. I never get to bed before three o’clock. What
kind of hour is that to go to bed?”

“He stays up because he likes it.”

“He’s lonely. I’m not lonely. I have a wife waiting in bed for me.”

“He had a wife once too.”

“A wife would be no good to him now.”

“You can’t tell. He might be better with a wife.”

“His niece looks after him.”

“I know. You said she cut him down.”

“I wouldn’t want to be that old. An old man is a nasty thing.”

“Not always. This old man is clean. He drinks without spilling. Even
now, drunk. Look at him.”

“I don’t want to look at him. I wish he would go home. He has no regard
for those who must work.”

The old man looked from his glass across the square, then over at the
waiters.

“Another brandy,” he said, pointing to his glass. The waiter who was in
a hurry came over.

“Finished,” he said, speaking with that omission of syntax stupid people
employ when talking to drunken people or foreigners. “No more tonight.
Close now.”

“Another,” said the old man.

“No. Finished.” The waiter wiped the edge of the table with a towel and
shook his head.

The old man stood up, slowly counted the saucers, took a leather coin
purse from his pocket and paid for the drinks, leaving half a peseta
tip.

The waiter watched him go down the street, a very old man walking
unsteadily but with dignity.

“Why didn’t you let him stay and drink?” the unhurried waiter asked.
They were putting up the shutters. “It is not half-past two.”

“I want to go home to bed.”

“What is an hour?”

“More to me than to him.”

“An hour is the same.”

“You talk like an old man yourself. He can buy a bottle and drink at
home.”

“It’s not the same.”

“No, it is not,” agreed the waiter with a wife. He did not wish to be
unjust. He was only in a hurry.

“And you? You have no fear of going home before your usual hour?”

“Are you trying to insult me?”

“No, hombre, only to make a joke.”

“No,” the waiter who was in a hurry said, rising from pulling down the
metal shutters. “I have confidence. I am all confidence.”

“You have youth, confidence, and a job,” the older waiter said. “You
have everything.”

“And what do you lack?”

“Everything but work.”

“You have everything I have.”

“No. I have never had confidence and I am not young.”

“Come on. Stop talking nonsense and lock up.”

“I am of those who like to stay late at the café,” the older waiter
said. “With all those who do not want to go to bed. With all those who
need a light for the night.”

“I want to go home and into bed.”

“We are of two different kinds,” the older waiter said. He was now
dressed to go home. “It is not only a question of youth and confidence
although those things are very beautiful. Each night I am reluctant to
close up because there may be some one who needs the café.”

“Hombre, there are bodegas open all night long.”

“You do not understand. This is a clean and pleasant café. It is well
lighted. The light is very good and also, now, there are shadows of the
leaves.”

“Good night,” said the younger waiter.

“Good night,” the other said. Turning off the electric light he
continued the conversation with himself. It is the light of course but
it is necessary that the place be clean and pleasant. You do not want
music. Certainly you do not want music. Nor can you stand before a bar
with dignity although that is all that is provided for these hours. What
did he fear? It was not fear or dread. It was a nothing that he knew too
well. It was all a nothing and a man was nothing too. It was only that
and light was all it needed and a certain cleanness and order. Some
lived in it and never felt it but he knew it all was nada y pues nada y
nada y pues nada. Our nada who art in nada, nada be thy name thy kingdom
nada thy will be nada in nada as it is in nada. Give us this nada our
daily nada and nada us our nada as we nada our nadas and nada us not
into nada but deliver us from nada; pues nada. Hail nothing full of
nothing, nothing is with thee. He smiled and stood before a bar with a
shining steam pressure coffee machine.

“What’s yours?” asked the barman.

“Nada.”

“Otro loco mas,” said the barman and turned away.

“A little cup,” said the waiter.

The barman poured it for him.

“The light is very bright and pleasant but the bar is unpolished,” the
waiter said.

The barman looked at him but did not answer. It was too late at night
for conversation.

“You want another copita?” the barman asked.

“No, thank you,” said the waiter and went out. He disliked bars and
bodegas. A clean, well-lighted café was a very different thing. Now,
without thinking further, he would go home to his room. He would lie in
the bed and finally, with daylight, he would go to sleep. After all, he
said to himself, it is probably only insomnia. Many must have it.




                         THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD


When he saw us come in the door the bartender looked up and then reached
over and put the glass covers on the two free-lunch bowls.

“Give me a beer,” I said. He drew it, cut the top off with the spatula
and then held the glass in his hand. I put the nickel on the wood and he
slid the beer toward me.

“What’s yours?” he said to Tom.

“Beer.”

He drew that beer and cut it off and when he saw the money he pushed the
beer across to Tom.

“What’s the matter?” Tom asked.

The bartender didn’t answer him. He just looked over our heads and said,
“What’s yours?” to a man who’d come in.

“Rye,” the man said. The bartender put out the bottle and glass and a
glass of water.

Tom reached over and took the glass off the free-lunch bowl. It was a
bowl of pickled pig’s feet and there was a wooden thing that worked like
a scissors, with two wooden forks at the end to pick them up with.

“No,” said the bartender and put the glass cover back on the bowl. Tom
held the wooden scissors fork in his hand. “Put it back,” said the
bartender.

“You know where,” said Tom.

The bartender reached a hand forward under the bar, watching us both. I
put fifty cents on the wood and he straightened up.

“What was yours?” he said.

“Beer,” I said, and before he drew the beer he uncovered both the bowls.

“Your goddam pig’s feet stink,” Tom said, and spit what he had in his
mouth on the floor. The bartender didn’t say anything. The man who had
drunk the rye paid and went out without looking back.

“You stink yourself,” the bartender said. “All you punks stink.”

“He says we’re punks,” Tommy said to me.

“Listen,” I said. “Let’s get out.”

“You punks clear the hell out of here,” the bartender said.

“I said we were going out,” I said. “It wasn’t your idea.”

“We’ll be back,” Tommy said.

“No you won’t,” the bartender told him.

“Tell him how wrong he is,” Tom turned to me.

“Come on,” I said.

Outside it was good and dark.

“What the hell kind of place is this?” Tommy said.

“I don’t know,” I said. “Let’s go down to the station.”

We’d come in that town at one end and we were going out the other. It
smelled of hides and tan bark and the big piles of sawdust. It was
getting dark as we came in, and now that it was dark it was cold and the
puddles of water in the road were freezing at the edges.

Down at the station there were five whores waiting for the train to come
in, and six white men and four Indians. It was crowded and hot from the
stove and full of stale smoke. As we came in nobody was talking and the
ticket window was down.

“Shut the door, can’t you?” somebody said.

I looked to see who said it. It was one of the white men. He wore
stagged trousers and lumbermen’s rubbers and a mackinaw shirt like the
others, but he had no cap and his face was white and his hands were
white and thin.

“Aren’t you going to shut it?”

“Sure,” I said, and shut it.

“Thank you,” he said. One of the other men snickered.

“Ever interfere with a cook?” he said to me.

“No.”

“You interfere with this one,” he looked at the cook. “He likes it.”

The cook looked away from him holding his lips tight together.

“He puts lemon juice on his hands,” the man said. “He wouldn’t get them
in dishwater for anything. Look how white they are.”

One of the whores laughed out loud. She was the biggest whore I ever saw
in my life and the biggest woman. And she had on one of those silk
dresses that change colors. There were two other whores that were nearly
as big but the big one must have weighed three hundred and fifty pounds.
You couldn’t believe she was real when you looked at her. All three had
those changeable silk dresses. They sat side by side on the bench. They
were huge. The other two were just ordinary looking whores, peroxide
blondes.

“Look at his hands,” the man said and nodded his head at the cook. The
whore laughed again and shook all over.

The cook turned and said to her quickly, “You big disgusting mountain of
flesh.”

She just kept on laughing and shaking.

“Oh, my Christ,” she said. She had a nice voice. “Oh, my sweet Christ.”

The two other whores, the big ones, acted very quiet and placid as
though they didn’t have much sense, but they were big, nearly as big as
the biggest one. They’d have both gone well over two hundred and fifty
pounds. The other two were dignified.

Of the men, besides the cook and the one who talked, there were two
other lumberjacks, one that listened, interested but bashful, and the
other that seemed getting ready to say something, and two Swedes. Two
Indians were sitting down at the end of the bench and one standing up
against the wall.

The man who was getting ready to say something spoke to me very low,
“Must be like getting on top of a hay mow.”

I laughed and said it to Tommy.

“I swear to Christ I’ve never been anywhere like this,” he said. “Look
at the three of them.” Then the cook spoke up.

“How old are you boys?”

“I’m ninety-six and he’s sixty-nine,” Tommy said.

“Ho! Ho! Ho!” the big whore shook with laughing. She had a really pretty
voice. The other whores didn’t smile.

“Oh, can’t you be decent?” the cook said. “I asked just to be friendly.”

“We’re seventeen and nineteen,” I said.

“What’s the matter with you?” Tommy turned to me.

“That’s all right.”

“You can call me Alice,” the big whore said and then she began to shake
again.

“Is that your name?” Tommy asked.

“Sure,” she said. “Alice. Isn’t it?” she turned to the man who sat by
the cook.

“Alice. That’s right.”

“That’s the sort of name you’d have,” the cook said.

“It’s my real name,” Alice said.

“What’s the other girls’ names?” Tom asked.

“Hazel and Ethel,” Alice said. Hazel and Ethel smiled. They weren’t very
bright.

“What’s your name?” I said to one of the blondes.

“Frances,” she said.

“Frances what?”

“Frances Wilson. What’s it to you?”

“What’s yours?” I asked the other one.

“Oh, don’t be fresh,” she said.

“He just wants us all to be friends,” the man who talked said. “Don’t
you want to be friends?”

“No,” the peroxide one said. “Not with you.”

“She’s just a spitfire,” the man said. “A regular little spitfire.”

The one blonde looked at the other and shook her head.

“Goddamned mossbacks,” she said.

Alice commenced to laugh again and to shake all over.

“There’s nothing funny,” the cook said. “You all laugh but there’s
nothing funny. You two young lads; where are you bound for?”

“Where are you going yourself?” Tom asked him.

“I want to go to Cadillac,” the cook said. “Have you ever been there? My
sister lives there.”

“He’s a sister himself,” the man in the stagged trousers said.

“Can’t you stop that sort of thing?” the cook asked. “Can’t we speak
decently?”

“Cadillac is where Steve Ketchel came from and where Ad Wolgast is
from,” the shy man said.

“Steve Ketchel,” one of the blondes said in a high voice as though the
name had pulled a trigger in her. “His own father shot and killed him.
Yes, by Christ, his own father. There aren’t any more men like Steve
Ketchel.”

“Wasn’t his name Stanley Ketchel?” asked the cook.

“Oh, shut up,” said the blonde. “What do you know about Steve? Stanley.
He was no Stanley. Steve Ketchel was the finest and most beautiful man
that ever lived. I never saw a man as clean and as white and as
beautiful as Steve Ketchel. There never was a man like that. He moved
just like a tiger and he was the finest, free-est, spender that ever
lived.”

“Did you know him?” one of the men asked.

“Did I know him? Did I know him? Did I love him? You ask me that? I knew
him like you know nobody in the world and I loved him like you love God.
He was the greatest, finest, whitest, most beautiful man that ever
lived, Steve Ketchel, and his own father shot him down like a dog.”

“Were you out on the coast with him?”

“No. I knew him before that. He was the only man I ever loved.”

Every one was very respectful to the peroxide blonde, who said all this
in a high stagey way, but Alice was beginning to shake again. I felt it
sitting by her.

“You should have married him,” the cook said.

“I wouldn’t hurt his career,” the peroxide blonde said. “I wouldn’t be a
drawback to him. A wife wasn’t what he needed. Oh, my God, what a man he
was.”

“That was a fine way to look at it,” the cook said. “Didn’t Jack Johnson
knock him out though?”

“It was a trick,” Peroxide said. “That big dinge took him by surprise.
He’d just knocked Jack Johnson down, the big black bastard. That nigger
beat him by a fluke.”

The ticket window went up and the three Indians went over to it.

“Steve knocked him down,” Peroxide said. “He turned to smile at me.”

“I thought you said you weren’t on the coast,” some one said.

“I went out just for that fight. Steve turned to smile at me and that
black son of a bitch from hell jumped up and hit him by surprise. Steve
could lick a hundred like that black bastard.”

“He was a great fighter,” the lumberjack said.

“I hope to God he was,” Peroxide said. “I hope to God they don’t have
fighters like that now. He was like a god, he was. So white and clean
and beautiful and smooth and fast and like a tiger or like lightning.”

“I saw him in the moving pictures of the fight,” Tom said. We were all
very moved. Alice was shaking all over and I looked and saw she was
crying. The Indians had gone outside on the platform.

“He was more than any husband could ever be,” Peroxide said. “We were
married in the eyes of God and I belong to him right now and always will
and all of me is his. I don’t care about my body. They can take my body.
My soul belongs to Steve Ketchel. By God, he was a man.”

Everybody felt terribly. It was sad and embarrassing. Then Alice, who
was still shaking, spoke. “You’re a dirty liar,” she said in that low
voice. “You never layed Steve Ketchel in your life and you know it.”

“How can you say that?” Peroxide said proudly.

“I say it because it’s true,” Alice said. “I’m the only one here that
ever knew Steve Ketchel and I come from Mancelona and I knew him there
and it’s true and you know it’s true and God can strike me dead if it
isn’t true.”

“He can strike me too,” Peroxide said.

“This is true, true, true, and you know it. Not just made up and I know
exactly what he said to me.”

“What did he say?” Peroxide asked, complacently.

Alice was crying so she could hardly speak from shaking so.

“He said ‘You’re a lovely piece, Alice.’ That’s exactly what he said.”

“It’s a lie,” Peroxide said.

“It’s true,” Alice said. “That’s truly what he said.”

“It’s a lie,” Peroxide said proudly.

“No, it’s true, true, true, to Jesus and Mary true.”

“Steve couldn’t have said that. It wasn’t the way he talked,” Peroxide
said happily.

“It’s true,” Alice said in her nice voice. “And it doesn’t make any
difference to me whether you believe it or not.” She wasn’t crying any
more and she was calm.

“It would be impossible for Steve to have said that,” Peroxide declared.

“He said it,” Alice said and smiled. “And I remember when he said it and
I was a lovely piece then exactly as he said, and right now I’m a better
piece than you, you dried up old hot-water bottle.”

“You can’t insult me,” said Peroxide. “You big mountain of pus. I have
my memories.”

“No,” Alice said in that sweet lovely voice, “you haven’t got any real
memories except having your tubes out and when you started C. and M.
Everything else you just read in the papers. I’m clean and you know it
and men like me, even though I’m big, and you know it, and I never lie
and you know it.”

“Leave me with my memories,” Peroxide said. “With my true, wonderful
memories.”

Alice looked at her and then at us and her face lost that hurt look and
she smiled and she had about the prettiest face I ever saw. She had a
pretty face and a nice smooth skin and a lovely voice and she was nice
all right and really friendly. But my God she was big. She was as big as
three women. Tom saw me looking at her and he said, “Come on. Let’s go.”

“Good-bye,” said Alice. She certainly had a nice voice.

“Good-bye,” I said.

“Which way are you boys going?” asked the cook.

“The other way from you,” Tom told him.




                     GOD REST YOU MERRY, GENTLEMEN


In those days the distances were all very different, the dirt blew off
the hills that now have been cut down, and Kansas City was very like
Constantinople. You may not believe this. No one believes this; but it
is true. On this afternoon it was snowing and inside an automobile
dealer’s show window, lighted against the early dark, there was a racing
motor car finished entirely in silver with Dans Argent lettered on the
hood. This I believed to mean the silver dance or the silver dancer,
and, slightly puzzled which it meant but happy in the sight of the car
and pleased by my knowledge of a foreign language, I went along the
street in the snow. I was walking from the Woolf Brothers’ saloon where,
on Christmas and Thanksgiving Day, a free turkey dinner was served,
toward the city hospital which was on a high hill that overlooked the
smoke, the buildings and the streets of the town. In the reception room
of the hospital were the two ambulance surgeons Doc Fischer and Doctor
Wilcox, sitting, the one before a desk, the other in a chair against the
wall.

Doc Fischer was thin, sand-blond, with a thin mouth, amused eyes and
gambler’s hands. Doctor Wilcox was short, dark and carried an indexed
book, _The Young Doctor’s Friend and Guide_, which, being consulted on
any given subject, told symptoms and treatment. It was also
cross-indexed so that being consulted on symptoms it gave diagnoses. Doc
Fischer had suggested that any future editions should be further
cross-indexed so that if consulted as to the treatments being given, it
would reveal ailments and symptoms. “As an aid to memory,” he said.

Doctor Wilcox was sensitive about this book but could not get along
without it. It was bound in limp leather and fitted his coat pocket and
he had bought it at the advice of one of his professors who had said,
“Wilcox, you have no business being a physician and I have done
everything in my power to prevent you from being certified as one. Since
you are now a member of this learned profession I advise you, in the
name of humanity, to obtain a copy of _The Young Doctor’s Friend and
Guide_ and use it, Doctor Wilcox. Learn to use it.”

Doctor Wilcox had said nothing but he had bought the leather-bound guide
that same day.

“Well, Horace,” Doc Fischer said as I came in the receiving room which
smelt of cigarettes, iodoform, carbolic and an over-heated radiator.

“Gentlemen,” I said.

“What news along the rialto?” Doc Fischer asked. He affected a certain
extravagance of speech which seemed to me to be of the utmost elegance.

“The free turkey at Woolf’s,” I answered.

“You partook?”

“Copiously.”

“Many of the confrères present?”

“All of them. The whole staff.”

“Much Yuletide cheer?”

“Not much.”

“Doctor Wilcox here has partaken slightly,” Doc Fischer said. Doctor
Wilcox looked up at him, then at me.

“Want a drink?” he asked.

“No, thanks,” I said.

“That’s all right,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“Horace,” Doc Fischer said, “you don’t mind me calling you Horace, do
you?”

“No.”

“Good old Horace. We’ve had an extremely interesting case.”

“I’ll say,” said Doctor Wilcox.

“You know the lad who was in here yesterday?”

“Which one?”

“The lad who sought eunuch-hood.”

“Yes.” I had been there when he came in. He was a boy about sixteen. He
came in with no hat on and was very excited and frightened but
determined. He was curly haired and well built and his lips were
prominent.

“What’s the matter with you, son?” Doctor Wilcox asked him.

“I want to be castrated,” the boy said.

“Why?” Doc Fischer asked.

“I’ve prayed and I’ve done everything and nothing helps.”

“Helps what?”

“That awful lust.”

“What awful lust?”

“The way I get. The way I can’t stop getting. I pray all night about
it.”

“Just what happens?” Doc Fischer asked.

The boy told him. “Listen, boy,” Doc Fischer said. “There’s nothing
wrong with you. That’s the way you’re supposed to be. There’s nothing
wrong with that.”

“It is wrong,” said the boy. “It’s a sin against purity. It’s a sin
against our Lord and Saviour.”

“No,” said Doc Fischer. “It’s a natural thing. It’s the way you are
supposed to be and later on you will think you are very fortunate.”

“Oh, you don’t understand,” the boy said.

“Listen,” Doc Fischer said and he told the boy certain things.

“No. I won’t listen. You can’t make me listen.”

“Please listen,” Doc Fischer said.

“You’re just a goddamned fool,” Doctor Wilcox said to the boy.

“Then you won’t do it?” the boy asked.

“Do what?”

“Castrate me.”

“Listen,” Doc Fischer said. “No one will castrate you. There is nothing
wrong with your body. You have a fine body and you must not think about
that. If you are religious remember that what you complain of is no
sinful state but the means of consummating a sacrament.”

“I can’t stop it happening,” the boy said. “I pray all night and I pray
in the daytime. It is a sin, a constant sin against purity.”

“Oh, go and ——” Doctor Wilcox said.

“When you talk like that I don’t hear you,” the boy said with dignity to
Doctor Wilcox. “Won’t you please do it?” he asked Doc Fischer.

“No,” said Doc Fischer. “I’ve told you, boy.”

“Get him out of here,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“I’ll get out,” the boy said. “Don’t touch me. I’ll get out.”

That was about five o’clock on the day before.

“So what happened?” I asked.

“So at one o’clock this morning,” Doc Fischer said, “we received the
youth self-mutilated with a razor.”

“Castrated?”

“No,” said Doc Fischer. “He didn’t know what castrate meant.”

“He may die,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“Why?”

“Loss of blood.”

“The good physician here, Doctor Wilcox, my colleague, was on call and
he was unable to find this emergency listed in his book.”

“The hell with you talking that way,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“I only mean it in the friendliest way, Doctor,” Doc Fischer said,
looking at his hands, at his hands that had, with his willingness to
oblige and his lack of respect for Federal statutes, made him his
trouble. “Horace here will bear me out that I only speak of it in the
very friendliest way. It was an amputation the young man performed,
Horace.”

“Well, I wish you wouldn’t ride me about it,” Doctor Wilcox said. “There
isn’t any need to ride me.”

“Ride you, Doctor, on the day, the very anniversary, of our Saviour’s
birth?”

“_Our_ Saviour? Ain’t you a Jew?” Doctor Wilcox said.

“So I am. So I am. It always is slipping my mind. I’ve never given it
its proper importance. So good of you to remind me. _Your_ Saviour.
That’s right. _Your_ Saviour, undoubtedly _your_ Saviour—and the ride
for Palm Sunday.”

“You’re too damned smart,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“An excellent diagnosis, Doctor. I was always too damned smart. Too
damned smart on the coast certainly. Avoid it, Horace. You haven’t much
tendency but sometimes I see a gleam. But what a diagnosis—and without
the book.”

“The hell with you,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“All in good time, Doctor,” Doc Fischer said. “All in good time. If
there is such a place I shall certainly visit it. I have even had a very
small look into it. No more than a peek, really. I looked away almost at
once. And do you know what the young man said, Horace, when the good
Doctor here brought him in? He said, ‘Oh, I asked you to do it. I asked
you so many times to do it’.”

“On Christmas Day, too,” Doctor Wilcox said.

“The significance of the particular day is not important,” Doc Fischer
said.

“Maybe not to you,” said Doctor Wilcox.

“You hear him, Horace?” Doc Fischer said. “You hear him? Having
discovered my vulnerable point, my achilles tendon so to speak, the
doctor pursues his advantage.”

“You’re too damned smart,” Doctor Wilcox said.




                             THE SEA CHANGE


“All right,” said the man. “What about it?”

“No,” said the girl, “I can’t.”

“You mean you won’t.”

“I can’t,” said the girl. “That’s all that I mean.”

“You mean that you won’t.”

“All right,” said the girl. “You have it your own way.”

“I don’t have it my own way. I wish to God I did.”

“You did for a long time,” the girl said.

It was early, and there was no one in the café except the barman and
these two who sat together at a table in the corner. It was the end of
the summer and they were both tanned, so that they looked out of place
in Paris. The girl wore a tweed suit, her skin was a smooth golden
brown, her blonde hair was cut short and grew beautifully away from her
forehead. The man looked at her.

“I’ll kill her,” he said.

“Please don’t,” the girl said. She had very fine hands and the man
looked at them. They were slim and brown and very beautiful.

“I will. I swear to God I will.”

“It won’t make you happy.”

“Couldn’t you have gotten into something else? Couldn’t you have gotten
into some other jam?”

“It seems not,” the girl said. “What are you going to do about it?”

“I told you.”

“No; I mean really.”

“I don’t know,” he said. She looked at him and put out her hand. “Poor
old Phil,” she said. He looked at her hands, but he did not touch her
hand with his.

“No, thanks,” he said.

“It doesn’t do any good to say I’m sorry?”

“No.”

“Nor to tell you how it is?”

“I’d rather not hear.”

“I love you very much.”

“Yes, this proves it.”

“I’m sorry,” she said, “if you don’t understand.”

“I understand. That’s the trouble. I understand.”

“You do,” she said. “That makes it worse, of course.”

“Sure,” he said, looking at her. “I’ll understand all the time. All day
and all night. Especially all night. I’ll understand. You don’t have to
worry about that.”

“I’m sorry,” she said.

“If it was a man——”

“Don’t say that. It wouldn’t be a man. You know that. Don’t you trust
me?”

“That’s funny,” he said. “Trust you. That’s really funny.”

“I’m sorry,” she said. “That’s all I seem to say. But when we do
understand each other there’s no use to pretend we don’t.”

“No,” he said. “I suppose not.”

“I’ll come back if you want me.”

“No. I don’t want you.”

Then they did not say anything for a while.

“You don’t believe I love you, do you?” the girl asked.

“Let’s not talk rot,” the man said.

“Don’t you really believe I love you?”

“Why don’t you prove it?”

“You didn’t use to be that way. You never asked me to prove anything.
That isn’t polite.”

“You’re a funny girl.”

“You’re not. You’re a fine man and it breaks my heart to go off and
leave you——”

“You have to, of course.”

“Yes,” she said. “I have to and you know it.”

He did not say anything and she looked at him and put her hand out
again. The barman was at the far end of the bar. His face was white and
so was his jacket. He knew these two and thought them a handsome young
couple. He had seen many handsome young couples break up and new couples
form that were never so handsome long. He was not thinking about this,
but about a horse. In half an hour he could send across the street to
find if the horse had won.

“Couldn’t you just be good to me and let me go?” the girl asked.

“What do you think I’m going to do?”

Two people came in the door and went up to the bar.

“Yes, sir,” the barman took the orders.

“You can’t forgive me? When you know about it?” the girl asked.

“No.”

“You don’t think things we’ve had and done should make any difference in
understanding?”

“‘Vice is a monster of such fearful mien,’” the young man said bitterly,
“that to be something or other needs but to be seen. Then we something,
something, then embrace.” He could not remember the words. “I can’t
quote,” he said.

“Let’s not say vice,” she said. “That’s not very polite.”

“Perversion,” he said.

“James,” one of the clients addressed the barman, “you’re looking very
well.”

“You’re looking very well yourself,” the barman said.

“Old James,” the other client said. “You’re fatter, James.”

“It’s terrible,” the barman said, “the way I put it on.”

“Don’t neglect to insert the brandy, James,” the first client said.

“No, sir,” said the barman. “Trust me.”

The two at the bar looked over at the two at the table, then looked back
at the barman again. Towards the barman was the comfortable direction.

“I’d like it better if you didn’t use words like that,” the girl said.
“There’s no necessity to use a word like that.”

“What do you want me to call it?”

“You don’t have to call it. You don’t have to put any name to it.”

“That’s the name for it.”

“No,” she said. “We’re made up of all sorts of things. You’ve known
that. You’ve used it well enough.”

“You don’t have to say that again.”

“Because that explains it to you.”

“All right,” he said. “All right.”

“You mean all wrong. I know. It’s all wrong. But I’ll come back. I told
you I’d come back. I’ll come back right away.”

“No, you won’t.”

“I’ll come back.”

“No, you won’t. Not to me.”

“You’ll see.”

“Yes,” he said. “That’s the hell of it. You probably will.”

“Of course I will.”

“Go on, then.”

“Really?” She could not believe him, but her voice was happy.

“Go on,” his voice sounded strange to him. He was looking at her, at the
way her mouth went and the curve of her cheek bones, at her eyes and at
the way her hair grew on her forehead and at the edge of her ear and at
her neck.

“Not really. Oh, you’re too sweet,” she said. “You’re too good to me.”

“And when you come back tell me all about it.” His voice sounded very
strange. He did not recognize it. She looked at him quickly. He was
settled into something.

“You want me to go?” she asked seriously.

“Yes,” he said seriously. “Right away.” His voice was not the same, and
his mouth was very dry. “Now,” he said.

She stood up and went out quickly. She did not look back at him. He
watched her go. He was not the same looking man as he had been before he
had told her to go. He got up from the table, picked up the two checks
and went over to the bar with them.

“I’m a different man, James,” he said to the barman. “You see in me
quite a different man.”

“Yes, sir?” said James.

“Vice,” said the brown young man, “is a very strange thing, James.” He
looked out the door. He saw her going down the street. As he looked in
the glass, he saw he was really quite a different looking man. The other
two at the bar moved down to make room for him.

“You’re right there, sir,” James said.

The other two moved down a little more, so that he would be quite
comfortable. The young man saw himself in the mirror behind the bar. “I
said I was a different man, James,” he said. Looking into the mirror he
saw that this was quite true.

“You look very well, sir,” James said. “You must have had a very good
summer.”




                         A WAY YOU’LL NEVER BE


The attack had gone across the field, been held up by machine-gun fire
from the sunken road and from the group of farm houses, encountered no
resistance in the town, and reached the bank of the river. Coming along
the road on a bicycle, getting off to push the machine when the surface
of the road became too broken, Nicholas Adams saw what had happened by
the position of the dead.

They lay alone or in clumps in the high grass of the field and along the
road, their pockets out, and over them were flies and around each body
or group of bodies were the scattered papers.

In the grass and the grain, beside the road, and in some places
scattered over the road, there was much material: a field kitchen, it
must have come over when things were going well; many of the
calf-skin-covered haversacks, stick bombs, helmets, rifles, sometimes
one butt up, the bayonet stuck in the dirt, they had dug quite a little
at the last; stick bombs, helmets, rifles, intrenching tools, ammunition
boxes, star-shell pistols, their shells scattered about, medical kits,
gas masks, empty gas-mask cans, a squat, tripodded machine gun in a nest
of empty shells, full belts protruding from the boxes, the water-cooling
can empty and on its side, the breech block gone, the crew in odd
positions, and around them, in the grass, more of the typical papers.

There were mass prayer books, group postcards showing the machine-gun
unit standing in ranked and ruddy cheerfulness as in a football picture
for a college annual; now they were humped and swollen in the grass;
propaganda postcards showing a soldier in Austrian uniform bending a
woman backward over a bed; the figures were impressionistically drawn;
very attractively depicted and had nothing in common with actual rape in
which the woman’s skirts are pulled over her head to smother her, one
comrade sometimes sitting upon the head. There were many of these
inciting cards which had evidently been issued just before the
offensive. Now they were scattered with the smutty postcards,
photographic; the small photographs of village girls by village
photographers, the occasional pictures of children, and the letters,
letters, letters. There was always much paper about the dead and the
débris of this attack was no exception.

These were new dead and no one had bothered with anything but their
pockets. Our own dead, or what he thought of, still, as our own dead,
were surprisingly few, Nick noticed. Their coats had been opened too and
their pockets were out, and they showed, by their positions, the manner
and the skill of the attack. The hot weather had swollen them all alike
regardless of nationality.

The town had evidently been defended, at the last, from the line of the
sunken road and there had been few or no Austrians to fall back into it.
There were only three bodies in the street and they looked to have been
killed running. The houses of the town were broken by the shelling and
the street had much rubble of plaster and mortar and there were broken
beams, broken tiles, and many holes, some of them yellow-edged from the
mustard gas. There were many pieces of shell, and shrapnel balls were
scattered in the rubble. There was no one in the town at all.

Nick Adams had seen no one since he had left Fornaci, although, riding
along the road through the over-foliaged country, he had seen guns
hidden under screens of mulberry leaves to the left of the road,
noticing them by the heatwaves in the air above the leaves where the sun
hit the metal. Now he went on through the town, surprised to find it
deserted, and came out on the low road beneath the bank of the river.
Leaving the town there was a bare open space where the road slanted down
and he could see the placid reach of the river and the low curve of the
opposite bank and the whitened, sun-baked mud where the Austrians had
dug. It was all very lush and over-green since he had seen it last and
becoming historical had made no change in this, the lower river.

The battalion was along the bank to the left. There was a series of
holes in the top of the bank with a few men in them. Nick noticed where
the machine guns were posted and the signal rockets in their racks. The
men in the holes in the side of the bank were sleeping. No one
challenged. He went on and as he came around a turn in the mud bank a
young second lieutenant with a stubble of beard and red-rimmed, very
blood-shot eyes pointed a pistol at him.

“Who are you?”

Nick told him.

“How do I know this?”

Nick showed him the tessera with photograph and identification and the
seal of the third army. He took hold of it.

“I will keep this.”

“You will not,” Nick said. “Give me back the card and put your gun away.
There. In the holster.”

“How am I to know who you are?”

“The tessera tells you.”

“And if the tessera is false? Give me that card.”

“Don’t be a fool,” Nick said cheerfully. “Take me to your company
commander.”

“I should send you to battalion headquarters.”

“All right,” said Nick. “Listen, do you know the Captain Paravicini? The
tall one with the small mustache who was an architect and speaks
English?”

“You know him?”

“A little.”

“What company does he command?”

“The second.”

“He is commanding the battalion.”

“Good,” said Nick. He was relieved to know that Para was all right. “Let
us go to the battalion.”

As Nick had left the edge of the town three shrapnel had burst high and
to the right over one of the wrecked houses and since then there had
been no shelling. But the face of this officer looked like the face of a
man during a bombardment. There was the same tightness and the voice did
not sound natural. His pistol made Nick nervous.

“Put it away,” he said. “There’s the whole river between them and you.”

“If I thought you were a spy I would shoot you now,” the second
lieutenant said.

“Come on,” said Nick. “Let us go to the battalion.” This officer made
him very nervous.

The Captain Paravicini, acting major, thinner and more English looking
than ever, rose when Nick saluted from behind the table in the dugout
that was battalion headquarters.

“Hello,” he said. “I didn’t know you. What are you doing in that
uniform?”

“They’ve put me in it.”

“I am very glad to see you, Nicolo.”

“Right. You look well. How was the show?”

“We made a very fine attack. Truly. A very fine attack. I will show you.
Look.”

He showed on the map how the attack had gone.

“I came from Fornaci,” Nick said. “I could see how it had been. It was
very good.”

“It was extraordinary. Altogether extraordinary. Are you attached to the
regiment?”

“No. I am supposed to move around and let them see the uniform.”

“How odd.”

“If they see one American uniform that is supposed to make them believe
others are coming.”

“But how will they know it is an American uniform?”

“You will tell them.”

“Oh. Yes, I see. I will send a corporal with you to show you about and
you will make a tour of the lines.”

“Like a bloody politician,” Nick said.

“You would be much more distinguished in civilian clothes. They are what
is really distinguished.”

“With a homburg hat,” said Nick.

“Or with a very furry fedora.”

“I’m supposed to have my pockets full of cigarettes and postal cards and
such things,” Nick said. “I should have a musette full of chocolate.
These I should distribute with a kind word and a pat on the back. But
there weren’t any cigarettes and postcards and no chocolate. So they
said to circulate around anyway.”

“I’m sure your appearance will be very heartening to the troops.”

“I wish you wouldn’t,” Nick said. “I feel badly enough about it as it
is. In principle, I would have brought you a bottle of brandy.”

“In principle,” Para said and smiled, for the first time, showing
yellowed teeth. “Such a beautiful expression. Would you like some
Grappa?”

“No, thank you,” Nick said.

“It hasn’t any ether in it.”

“I can taste that still,” Nick remembered suddenly and completely.

“You know I never knew you were drunk until you started talking coming
back in the camions.”

“I was stinking in every attack,” Nick said.

“I can’t do it,” Para said. “I took it in the first show, the very first
show, and it only made me very upset and then frightfully thirsty.”

“You don’t need it.”

“You’re much braver in an attack than I am.”

“No,” Nick said. “I know how I am and I prefer to get stinking. I’m not
ashamed of it.”

“I’ve never seen you drunk.”

“No?” said Nick. “Never? Not when we rode from Mestre to Portogrande
that night and I wanted to go to sleep and used the bicycle for a
blanket and pulled it up under my chin?”

“That wasn’t in the lines.”

“Let’s not talk about how I am,” Nick said. “It’s a subject I know too
much about to want to think about it any more.”

“You might as well stay here a while,” Paravicini said. “You can take a
nap if you like. They didn’t do much to this in the bombardment. It’s
too hot to go out yet.”

“I suppose there is no hurry.”

“How are you really?”

“I’m fine. I’m perfectly all right.”

“No. I mean really.”

“I’m all right. I can’t sleep without a light of some sort. That’s all I
have now.”

“I said it should have been trepanned. I’m no doctor but I know that.”

“Well, they thought it was better to have it absorb, and that’s what I
got. What’s the matter? I don’t seem crazy to you, do I?”

“You seem in top-hole shape.”

“It’s a hell of a nuisance once they’ve had you certified as nutty,”
Nick said. “No one ever has any confidence in you again.”

“I would take a nap, Nicolo,” Paravicini said. “This isn’t battalion
headquarters as we used to know it. We’re just waiting to be pulled out.
You oughtn’t to go out in the heat now—it’s silly. Use that bunk.”

“I might just lie down,” Nick said.

Nick lay on the bunk. He was very disappointed that he felt this way and
more disappointed, even, that it was so obvious to Captain Paravicini.
This was not as large a dugout as the one where that platoon of the
class of 1899, just out at the front, got hysterics during the
bombardment before the attack, and Para had had him walk them two at a
time outside to show them nothing would happen, he wearing his own chin
strap tight across his mouth to keep his lips quiet. Knowing they could
not hold it when they took it. Knowing it was all a bloody balls—If he
can’t stop crying, break his nose to give him something else to think
about. I’d shoot one but it’s too late now. They’d all be worse. Break
his nose. They’ve put it back to five-twenty. We’ve only got four
minutes more. Break that other silly bugger’s nose and kick his silly
ass out of here. Do you think they’ll go over? If they don’t, shoot two
and try to scoop the others out some way. Keep behind them, sergeant.
It’s no use to walk ahead and find there’s nothing coming behind you.
Bail them out as you go. What a bloody balls. All right. That’s right.
Then, looking at the watch, in that quiet tone, that valuable quiet
tone, “Savoia.” Making it cold, no time to get it, he couldn’t find his
own after the cave-in, one whole end had caved in; it was that started
them; making it cold up that slope the only time he hadn’t done it
stinking. And after they came back the teleferica house burned, it
seemed, and some of the wounded got down four days later and some did
not get down, but we went up and we went back and we came down—we
always came down. And there was Gaby Delys, oddly enough, with feathers
on; you called me baby doll a year ago tadada you said that I was rather
nice to know tadada with feathers on, with feathers off, the great Gaby,
and my name’s Harry Pilcer, too, we used to step out of the far side of
the taxis when it got steep going up the hill and he could see that hill
every night when he dreamed with Sacré Coeur, blown white, like a soap
bubble. Sometimes his girl was there and sometimes she was with some one
else and he could not understand that, but those were the nights the
river ran so much wider and stiller than it should and outside of
Fossalta there was a low house painted yellow with willows all around it
and a low stable and there was a canal, and he had been there a thousand
times and never seen it, but there it was every night as plain as the
hill, only it frightened him. That house meant more than anything and
every night he had it. That was what he needed but it frightened him
especially when the boat lay there quietly in the willows on the canal,
but the banks weren’t like this river. It was all lower, as it was at
Portogrande, where they had seen them come wallowing across the flooded
ground holding the rifles high until they fell with them in the water.
Who ordered that one? If it didn’t get so damned mixed up he could
follow it all right. That was why he noticed everything in such detail
to keep it all straight so he would know just where he was, but suddenly
it confused without reason as now, he lying in a bunk at battalion
headquarters, with Para commanding a battalion and he in a bloody
American uniform. He sat up and looked around; they all watching him.
Para was gone out. He lay down again.

The Paris part came earlier and he was not frightened of it except when
she had gone off with some one else and the fear that they might take
the same driver twice. That was what frightened about that. Never about
the front. He never dreamed about the front now any more but what
frightened him so that he could not get rid of it was that long yellow
house and the different width of the river. Now he was back here at the
river, he had gone through that same town, and there was no house. Nor
was the river that way. Then where did he go each night and what was the
peril, and why would he wake, soaking wet, more frightened than he had
ever been in a bombardment, because of a house and a long stable and a
canal?

He sat up, swung his legs carefully down; they stiffened any time they
were out straight for long; returned the stares of the adjutant, the
signallers and the two runners by the door and put on his cloth-covered
trench helmet.

“I regret the absence of the chocolate, the postal-cards and
cigarettes,” he said. “I am, however, wearing the uniform.”

“The major is coming back at once,” the adjutant said. In that army an
adjutant is not a commissioned officer.

“The uniform is not very correct,” Nick told them. “But it gives you the
idea. There will be several millions of Americans here shortly.”

“Do you think they will send Americans down here?” asked the adjutant.

“Oh, absolutely. Americans twice as large as myself, healthy, with clean
hearts, sleep at night, never been wounded, never been blown up, never
had their heads caved in, never been scared, don’t drink, faithful to
the girls they left behind them, many of them never had crabs, wonderful
chaps. You’ll see.”

“Are you an Italian?” asked the adjutant.

“No, American. Look at the uniform. Spagnolini made it but it’s not
quite correct.”

“A North or South American?”

“North,” said Nick. He felt it coming on now. He would quiet down.

“But you speak Italian.”

“Why not? Do you mind if I speak Italian? Haven’t I a right to speak
Italian?”

“You have Italian medals.”

“Just the ribbons and the papers. The medals come later. Or you give
them to people to keep and the people go away; or they are lost with
your baggage. You can purchase others in Milan. It is the papers that
are of importance. You must not feel badly about them. You will have
some yourself if you stay at the front long enough.”

“I am a veteran of the Iritrea campaign,” said the adjutant stiffly. “I
fought in Tripoli.”

“It’s quite something to have met you,” Nick put out his hand. “Those
must have been trying days. I noticed the ribbons. Were you, by any
chance, on the Carso?”

“I have just been called up for this war. My class was too old.”

“At one time I was under the age limit,” Nick said. “But now I am
reformed out of the war.”

“But why are you here now?”

“I am demonstrating the American uniform,” Nick said. “Don’t you think
it is very significant? It is a little tight in the collar but soon you
will see untold millions wearing this uniform swarming like locusts. The
grasshopper, you know, what we call the grasshopper in America, is
really a locust. The true grasshopper is small and green and
comparatively feeble. You must not, however, make a confusion with the
seven-year locust or cicada which emits a peculiar sustained sound which
at the moment I cannot recall. I try to recall it but I cannot. I can
almost hear it and then it is quite gone. You will pardon me if I break
off our conversation?”

“See if you can find the major,” the adjutant said to one of the two
runners. “I can see you have been wounded,” he said to Nick.

“In various places,” Nick said. “If you are interested in scars I can
show you some very interesting ones but I would rather talk about
grasshoppers. What we call grasshoppers that is; and what are, really,
locusts. These insects at one time played a very important part in my
life. It might interest you and you can look at the uniform while I am
talking.”

The adjutant made a motion with his hand to the second runner who went
out.

“Fix your eyes on the uniform. Spagnolini made it, you know. You might
as well look, too,” Nick said to the signallers. “I really have no rank.
We’re under the American consul. It’s perfectly all right for you to
look. You can stare, if you like. I will tell you about the American
locust. We always preferred one that we called the medium-brown. They
last the best in the water and fish prefer them. The larger ones that
fly making a noise somewhat similar to that produced by a rattlesnake
rattling his rattlers, a very dry sound, have vivid colored wings, some
are bright red, others yellow barred with black, but their wings go to
pieces in the water and they make a very blowsy bait, while the
medium-brown is a plump, compact, succulent hopper that I can recommend
as far as one may well recommend something you gentlemen will probably
never encounter. But I must insist that you will never gather a
sufficient supply of these insects for a day’s fishing by pursuing them
with your hands or trying to hit them with a hat. That is sheer nonsense
and a useless waste of time. I repeat, gentlemen, that you will get
nowhere at it. The correct procedure, and one which should be taught all
young officers at every small-arms course if I had anything to say about
it, and who knows but what I will have, is the employment of a seine or
net made of common mosquito netting. Two officers holding this length of
netting at alternate ends, or let us say one at each end, stoop, hold
the bottom extremity of the net in one hand and the top extremity in the
other and run into the wind. The hoppers, flying with the wind, fly
against the length of netting and are imprisoned in its folds. It is no
trick at all to catch a very great quantity indeed, and no officer, in
my opinion, should be without a length of mosquito netting suitable for
the improvisation of one of these grasshopper seines. I hope I have made
myself clear, gentlemen. Are there any questions? If there is anything
in the course you do not understand please ask questions. Speak up.
None? Then I would like to close on this note. In the words of that
great soldier and gentleman, Sir Henry Wilson: Gentlemen, either you
must govern or you must be governed. Let me repeat it. Gentlemen, there
is one thing I would like to have you remember. One thing I would like
you to take with you as you leave this room. Gentlemen, either you must
govern—or you must be governed. That is all, gentlemen. Good-day.”

He removed his cloth-covered helmet, put it on again and, stooping, went
out the low entrance of the dugout. Para, accompanied by the two
runners, was coming down the line of the sunken road. It was very hot in
the sun and Nick removed the helmet.

“There ought to be a system for wetting these things,” he said. “I shall
wet this one in the river.” He started up the bank.

“Nicolo,” Paravicini called. “Nicolo. Where are you going?”

“I don’t really have to go.” Nick came down the slope, holding the
helmet in his hands. “They’re a damned nuisance wet or dry. Do you wear
yours all the time?”

“All the time,” said Para. “It’s making me bald. Come inside.”

Inside Para told him to sit down.

“You know they’re absolutely no damned good,” Nick said. “I remember
when they were a comfort when we first had them, but I’ve seen them full
of brains too many times.”

“Nicolo,” Para said. “I think you should go back. I think it would be
better if you didn’t come up to the line until you had those supplies.
There’s nothing here for you to do. If you move around, even with
something worth giving away, the men will group and that invites
shelling. I won’t have it.”

“I know it’s silly,” Nick said. “It wasn’t my idea. I heard the brigade
was here so I thought I would see you or some one else I knew. I could
have gone to Zenzon or to San Dona. I’d like to go to San Dona to see
the bridge again.”

“I won’t have you circulating around to no purpose,” Captain Paravicini
said.

“All right,” said Nick. He felt it coming on again.

“You understand?”

“Of course,” said Nick. He was trying to hold it in.

“Anything of that sort should be done at night.”

“Naturally,” said Nick. He knew he could not stop it now.

“You see, I am commanding the battalion,” Para said.

“And why shouldn’t you be?” Nick said. Here it came. “You can read and
write, can’t you?”

“Yes,” said Para gently.

“The trouble is you have a damned small battalion to command. As soon as
it gets to strength again they’ll give you back your company. Why don’t
they bury the dead? I’ve seen them now. I don’t care about seeing them
again. They can bury them any time as far as I’m concerned and it would
be much better for you. You’ll all get bloody sick.”

“Where did you leave your bicycle?”

“Inside the last house.”

“Do you think it will be all right?”

“Don’t worry,” Nick said. “I’ll go in a little while.”

“Lie down a little while, Nicolo.”

“All right.”

He shut his eyes, and in place of the man with the beard who looked at
him over the sights of the rifle, quite calmly before squeezing off, the
white flash and clublike impact, on his knees, hot-sweet choking,
coughing it onto the rock while they went past him, he saw a long,
yellow house with a low stable and the river much wider than it was and
stiller. “Christ,” he said, “I might as well go.”

He stood up.

“I’m going, Para,” he said. “I’ll ride back now in the afternoon. If any
supplies have come I’ll bring them down tonight. If not I’ll come at
night when I have something to bring.”

“It is still hot to ride,” Captain Paravicini said.

“You don’t need to worry,” Nick said. “I’m all right now for quite a
while. I had one then but it was easy. They’re getting much better. I
can tell when I’m going to have one because I talk so much.”

“I’ll send a runner with you.”

“I’d rather you didn’t. I know the way.”

“You’ll be back soon?”

“Absolutely.”

“Let me send——”

“No,” said Nick. “As a mark of confidence.”

“Well, Ciaou then.”

“Ciaou,” said Nick. He started back along the sunken road toward where
he had left the bicycle. In the afternoon the road would be shady once
he had passed the canal. Beyond that there were trees on both sides that
had not been shelled at all. It was on that stretch that, marching, they
had once passed the Terza Savoia cavalry regiment riding in the snow
with their lances. The horses’ breath made plumes in the cold air. No,
that was somewhere else. Where was that?

“I’d better get to that damned bicycle,” Nick said to himself. “I don’t
want to lose the way to Fornaci.”




                         THE MOTHER OF A QUEEN


When his father died he was only a kid and his manager buried him
perpetually. That is, so he would have the plot permanently. But when
his mother died his manager thought they might not always be so hot on
each other. They were sweethearts; sure he’s a queen, didn’t you know
that, of course he is. So he just buried her for five years.

Well, when he came back to Mexico from Spain he got the first notice. It
said it was the first notice that the five years were up and would he
make arrangements for the continuing of his mother’s grave. It was only
twenty dollars for perpetual. I had the cash box then and I said let me
attend to it, Paco. But he said no, he would look after it. He’d look
after it right away. It was his mother and he wanted to do it himself.

Then in a week he got the second notice. I read it to him and I said I
thought he had looked after it.

No, he said, he hadn’t.

“Let me do it,” I said. “It’s right here in the cash box.”

No, he said. Nobody could tell him what to do. He’d do it himself when
he got around to it. “What’s the sense in spending money sooner than
necessary?”

“All right,” I said, “but see you look after it.” At this time he had a
contract for six fights at four thousand pesos a fight besides his
benefit fight. He made over fifteen thousand dollars there in the
capital alone. He was just tight, that’s all.

The third notice came in another week and I read it to him. It said that
if he did not make the payment by the following Saturday his mother’s
grave would be opened and her remains dumped on the common boneheap. He
said he would go attend to it that afternoon when he went to town.

“Why not have me do it?” I asked him.

“Keep out of my business,” he said. “It’s my business and I’m going to
do it.”

“All right, if that’s the way you feel about it,” I said. “Do your own
business.”

He got the money out of the cash box, although then he always carried a
hundred or more pesos with him all the time, and he said he would look
after it. He went out with the money and so of course I thought he had
attended to it.

A week later the notice came that they had no response to the final
warning and so his mother’s body had been dumped on the boneheap; on the
public boneheap.

“Jesus Christ,” I said to him, “you said you’d pay that and you took
money out of the cash box to do it and now what’s happened to your
mother? My God, think of it! The public boneheap and your own mother.
Why didn’t you let me look after it? I would have sent it when the first
notice came.”

“It’s none of your business. It’s _my_ mother.”

“It’s none of _my_ business, yes, but it was _your_ business. What kind
of blood is it in a man that will let that be done to his mother? You
don’t deserve to have a mother.”

“It is my mother,” he said. “Now she is so much dearer to me. Now I
don’t have to think of her buried in one place and be sad. Now she is
all about me in the air, like the birds and the flowers. Now she will
always be with me.”

“Jesus Christ,” I said, “what kind of blood have you anyway? I don’t
want you to even speak to me.”

“She is all around me,” he said. “Now I will never be sad.”

At that time he was spending all kinds of money around women trying to
make himself seem a man and fool people, but it didn’t have any effect
on people that knew anything about him. He owed me over six hundred
pesos and he wouldn’t pay me. “Why do you want it now?” he’d say. “Don’t
you trust me? Aren’t we friends?”

“It isn’t friends or trusting you. It’s that I paid the accounts out of
my own money while you were away and now I need the money back and you
have it to pay me.”

“I haven’t got it.”

“You have it,” I said. “It’s in the cash box now and you can pay me.”

“I need that money for something,” he said. “You don’t know all the
needs I have for money.”

“I stayed here all the time you were in Spain and you authorized me to
pay these things as they came up, all these things of the house, and you
didn’t send any money while you were gone and I paid over six hundred
pesos in my own money and now I need it and you can pay me.”

“I’ll pay you soon,” he said. “Right now I need the money badly.”

“For what?”

“For my own business.”

“Why don’t you pay me some on account?”

“I can’t,” he said. “I need that money too badly. But I will pay you.”

He had only fought twice in Spain, they couldn’t stand him there, they
saw through him quick enough, and he had seven new fighting suits made
and this is the kind of thing he was: he had them packed so badly that
four of them were ruined by sea water on the trip back and he couldn’t
even wear them.

“My God,” I said to him, “you go to Spain. You stay there the whole
season and only fight two times. You spend all the money you took with
you on suits and then have them spoiled by salt water so you can’t wear
them. That is the kind of season you have and then you talk to me about
running your own business. Why don’t you pay me the money you owe me so
I can leave?”

“I want you here,” he said, “and I will pay you. But now I need the
money.”

“You need it too badly to pay for your own mother’s grave to keep your
mother buried. Don’t you?” I said.

“I am happy about what has happened to my mother,” he said. “You cannot
understand.”

“Thank Christ I can’t,” I said. “You pay me what you owe me or I will
take it out of the cash box.”

“I will keep the cash box myself,” he said.

“No, you won’t,” I said.

That very afternoon he came to me with a punk, some fellow from his own
town who was broke, and said, “Here is a paesano who needs money to go
home because his mother is very sick.” This fellow was just a punk, you
understand, a nobody he’d never seen before, but from his home town, and
he wanted to be the big, generous matador with a fellow townsman.

“Give him fifty pesos from the cash box,” he told me.

“You just told me you had no money to pay me,” I said. “And now you want
to give fifty pesos to this punk.”

“He is a fellow townsman,” he said, “and he is in distress.”

“You bitch,” I said. I gave him the key of the cash box. “Get it
yourself. I’m going to town.”

“Don’t be angry,” he said. “I’m going to pay you.”

I got the car out to go to town. It was his car but he knew I drove it
better than he did. Everything he did I could do better. He knew it. He
couldn’t even read and write. I was going to see somebody and see what I
could do about making him pay me. He came out and said, “I’m coming with
you and I’m going to pay you. We are good friends. There is no need to
quarrel.”

We drove into the city and I was driving. Just before we came into the
town he pulled out twenty pesos.

“Here’s the money,” he said.

“You motherless bitch,” I said to him and told him what he could do with
the money. “You give fifty pesos to that punk and then offer me twenty
when you owe me six hundred. I wouldn’t take a nickel from you. You know
what you can do with it.”

I got out of the car without a peso in my pocket and I didn’t know where
I was going to sleep that night. Later I went out with a friend and got
my things from his place. I never spoke to him again until this year. I
met him walking with three friends in the evening on the way to the
Callao cinema in the Gran Via in Madrid. He put his hand out to me.

“Hello Roger, old friend,” he said to me. “How are you? People say you
are talking against me. That you say all sorts of unjust things about
me.”

“All I say is you never had a mother,” I said to him. That’s the worst
thing you can say to insult a man in Spanish.

“That’s true,” he said. “My poor mother died when I was so young it
seems as though I never had a mother. It’s very sad.”

There’s a queen for you. You can’t touch them. Nothing, nothing can
touch them. They spend money on themselves or for vanity, but they never
pay. Try to get one to pay. I told him what I thought of him right there
on the Gran Via, in front of three friends, but he speaks to me now when
I meet him as though we were friends. What kind of blood is it that
makes a man like that?




                           ONE READER WRITES


She sat at the table in her bedroom with a newspaper folded open before
her and only stopping to look out of the window at the snow which was
falling and melting on the roof as it fell. She wrote this letter,
writing it steadily with no necessity to cross out or rewrite anything.

                                                   Roanoke, Virginia
                                                    February 6, 1933
    Dear Doctor—

    May I write you for some very important advice—I have a
    decision to make and don’t know just whom to trust most I dare
    not ask my parents—and so I come to you—and only because I
    need not see you, can I confide in you even. Now here is the
    situation—I married a man in U. S. service in 1929 and that
    same year he was sent to China, Shanghai—he staid three
    years—and came home—he was discharged from the service some
    few months ago—and went to his mother’s home in Helena,
    Arkansas. He wrote for me to come home—I went, and found he is
    taking a course of injections and I naturally ask, and found he
    is being treated for I don’t know how to spell the word but it
    sound like this “sifilus”—Do you know what I mean—now tell me
    will it ever be safe for me to live with him again—I did not
    come in close contact with him at any time since his return from
    China. He assures me he will be O K after this doctor finishes
    with him—Do you think it right—I often heard my Father say one
    could well wish themselves dead if once they become a victim of
    that malady—I believe my Father but want to believe my Husband
    most—Please, please tell me what to do—I have a daughter born
    while her Father was in China—

    Thanking you and trusting wholly in your advice I am

and signed her name.

Maybe he can tell me what’s right to do, she said to herself. Maybe he
can tell me. In the picture in the paper he looks like he’d know. He
looks smart, all right. Every day he tells somebody what to do. He ought
to know. I want to do whatever is right. It’s such a long time though.
It’s a long time. And it’s been a long time. My Christ, it’s been a long
time. He had to go wherever they sent him, I know, but I don’t know what
he had to get it for. Oh, I wish to Christ he wouldn’t have got it. I
don’t care what he did to get it. But I wish to Christ he hadn’t ever
got it. It does seem like he didn’t have to have got it. I don’t know
what to do. I wish to Christ he hadn’t got any kind of malady. I don’t
know why he had to get a malady.




                         HOMAGE TO SWITZERLAND


                                 PART I

                  PORTRAIT OF MR. WHEELER IN MONTREUX

Inside the station café it was warm and light. The wood of the tables
shone from wiping and there were baskets of pretzels in glazed paper
sacks. The chairs were carved, but the seats were worn and comfortable.
There was a carved wooden clock on the wall and a bar at the far end of
the room. Outside the window it was snowing.

Two of the station porters sat drinking new wine at the table under the
clock. Another porter came in and said the Simplon-Orient Express was an
hour late at Saint Maurice. He went out. The waitress came over to Mr.
Wheeler’s table.

“The Express is an hour late, sir,” she said. “Can I bring you some
coffee?”

“If you think it won’t keep me awake.”

“Please?” asked the waitress.

“Bring me some,” said Mr. Wheeler.

“Thank you.”

She brought the coffee from the kitchen and Mr. Wheeler looked out the
window at the snow falling in the light from the station platform.

“Do you speak other languages besides English?” he asked the waitress.

“Oh, yes, sir. I speak German and French and the dialects.”

“Would you like a drink of something?”

“Oh, no, sir. It is not permitted to drink in the café with the
clients.”

“You won’t take a cigar?”

“Oh, no, sir. I don’t smoke, sir.”

“That is all right,” said Mr. Wheeler. He looked out of the window
again, drank the coffee, and lit a cigarette.

“Fräulein,” he called. The waitress came over.

“What would you like, sir?”

“You,” he said.

“You must not joke me like that.”

“I’m not joking.”

“Then you must not say it.”

“I haven’t time to argue,” Mr. Wheeler said. “The train comes in forty
minutes. If you’ll go upstairs with me I’ll give you a hundred francs.”

“You should not say such things, sir. I will ask the porter to speak
with you.”

“I don’t want a porter,” Mr. Wheeler said. “Nor a policeman nor one of
those boys that sell cigarettes. I want you.”

“If you talk like that you must go out. You cannot stay here and talk
like that.”

“Why don’t you go away, then? If you go away I can’t talk to you.”

The waitress went away. Mr. Wheeler watched to see if she spoke to the
porters. She did not.

“Mademoiselle!” he called. The waitress came over. “Bring me a bottle of
Sion, please.”

“Yes, sir.”

Mr. Wheeler watched her go out, then come in with the wine and bring it
to his table. He looked toward the clock.

“I’ll give you two hundred francs,” he said.

“Please do not say such things.”

“Two hundred francs is a great deal of money.”

“You will not say such things!” the waitress said. She was losing her
English. Mr. Wheeler looked at her interestedly.

“Two hundred francs.”

“You are hateful.”

“Why don’t you go away, then? I can’t talk to you if you’re not here.”

The waitress left the table and went over to the bar. Mr. Wheeler drank
the wine and smiled to himself for some time.

“Mademoiselle,” he called. The waitress pretended not to hear him.
“Mademoiselle,” he called again. The waitress came over.

“You wish something?”

“Very much. I’ll give you three hundred francs.”

“You are hateful.”

“Three hundred francs Swiss.”

She went away and Mr. Wheeler looked after her. A porter opened the
door. He was the one who had Mr. Wheeler’s bags in his charge.

“The train is coming, sir,” he said in French. Mr. Wheeler stood up.

“Mademoiselle,” he called. The waitress came toward the table. “How much
is the wine?”

“Seven francs.”

Mr. Wheeler counted out eight francs and left them on the table. He put
on his coat and followed the porter onto the platform where the snow was
falling.

“Au revoir, mademoiselle,” he said. The waitress watched him go. He’s
ugly, she thought, ugly and hateful. Three hundred francs for a thing
that is nothing to do. How many times have I done that for nothing. And
no place to go here. If he had sense he would know there was no place.
No time and no place to go. Three hundred francs to do that. What people
those Americans.

Standing on the cement platform beside his bags, looking down the rails
toward the headlight of the train coming through the snow, Mr. Wheeler
was thinking that it was very inexpensive sport. He had only spent,
actually, aside from the dinner, seven francs for a bottle of wine and a
franc for the tip. Seventy-five centimes would have been better. He
would have felt better now if the tip had been seventy-five centimes.
One franc Swiss is five francs French. Mr. Wheeler was headed for Paris.
He was very careful about money and did not care for women. He had been
in that station before and he knew there was no upstairs to go to. Mr.
Wheeler never took chances.


                                PART II

                  MR. JOHNSON TALKS ABOUT IT AT VEVEY

Inside the station café it was warm and light; the tables were shiny
from wiping and on some there were red and white striped table cloths;
and there were blue and white striped table cloths on the others and on
all of them baskets with pretzels in glazed paper sacks. The chairs were
carved but the wood seats were worn and comfortable. There was a clock
on the wall, a zinc bar at the far end of the room, and outside the
window it was snowing. Two of the station porters sat drinking new wine
at the table under the clock.

Another porter came in and said the Simplon-Orient Express was an hour
late at Saint Maurice. The waitress came over to Mr. Johnson’s table.

“The Express is an hour late, sir,” she said. “Can I bring you some
coffee?”

“If it’s not too much trouble.”

“Please?” asked the waitress.

“I’ll take some.”

“Thank you.”

She brought the coffee from the kitchen and Mr. Johnson looked out the
window at the snow falling in the light from the station platform.

“Do you speak other languages besides English?” he asked the waitress.

“Oh, yes, I speak German and French and the dialects.”

“Would you like a drink of something?”

“Oh, no, sir, it is not permitted to drink in the café with the
clients.”

“Have a cigar?”

“Oh, no, sir,” she laughed. “I don’t smoke, sir.”

“Neither do I,” said Johnson. “It’s a dirty habit.”

The waitress went away and Johnson lit a cigarette and drank the coffee.
The clock on the wall marked a quarter to ten. His watch was a little
fast. The train was due at ten-thirty—an hour late meant eleven-thirty.
Johnson called to the waitress.

“Signorina!”

“What would you like, sir?”

“You wouldn’t like to play with me?” Johnson asked. The waitress
blushed.

“No, sir.”

“I don’t mean anything violent. You wouldn’t like to make up a party and
see the night life of Vevey? Bring a girl friend if you like.”

“I must work” the waitress said. “I have my duty here.”

“I know,” said Johnson. “But couldn’t you get a substitute? They used to
do that in the Civil War.”

“Oh, no, sir. I must be here myself in the person.”

“Where did you learn your English?”

“At the Berlitz school, sir.”

“Tell me about it,” Johnson said. “Were the Berlitz undergraduates a
wild lot? What about all this necking and petting? Were there many
smoothies? Did you ever run into Scott Fitzgerald?”

“Please?”

“I mean were your college days the happiest days of your life? What sort
of team did Berlitz have last fall?”

“You are joking, sir?”

“Only feebly,” said Johnson. “You’re an awfully good girl. And you don’t
want to play with me?”

“Oh, no, sir,” said the waitress. “Would you like me to bring you
something?”

“Yes,” said Johnson. “Would you bring me the wine list?”

“Yes, sir.”

Johnson walked over with the wine list to the table where the three
porters sat. They looked up at him. They were old men.

“Wollen Sie trinken?” he asked. One of them nodded and smiled.

“Oui, monsieur.”

“You speak French?”

“Oui, monsieur.”

“What shall we drink? Connais vous des champagnes?”

“Non, monsieur.”

“Faut les connaître,” said Johnson. “Fräulein,” he called the waitress.
“We will drink champagne.”

“Which champagne would you prefer, sir?”

“The best,” said Johnson. “Laquelle est le best?” he asked the porters.

“Le meillieur?” asked the porter who had spoken first.

“By all means.”

The porter took out a pair of gold-rimmed glasses from his coat pocket
and looked over the list. He ran his finger down the four typewritten
names and prices.

“Sportsman,” he said. “Sportsman is the best.”

“You agree, gentlemen?” Johnson asked the other porters. The one porter
nodded. The other said in French, “I don’t know them personally but I’ve
often heard speak of Sportsman. It’s good.”

“A bottle of Sportsman,” Johnson said to the waitress. He looked at the
price on the wine card: eleven francs Swiss. “Make it two Sportsmen. Do
you mind if I sit here with you?” he asked the porter who had suggested
Sportsman.

“Sit down. Put yourself here, please.” The porter smiled at him. He was
folding his spectacles and putting them away in their case. “Is it the
gentleman’s birthday?”

“No,” said Johnson. “It’s not a fête. My wife has decided to divorce
me.”

“So,” said the porter. “I hope not.” The other porter shook his head.
The third porter seemed a little deaf.

“It is doubtless a common experience,” said Johnson, “like the first
visit to the dentist or the first time a girl is unwell, but I have been
upset.”

“It is understandable,” said the oldest porter. “I understand it.”

“None of you gentlemen is divorced?” Johnson asked. He had stopped
clowning with the language and was speaking good French now and had been
for some time.

“No,” said the porter who had ordered Sportsman. “They don’t divorce
much here. There are gentlemen who are divorced but not many.”

“With us,” said Johnson, “it’s different. Practically every one is
divorced.”

“That’s true,” the porter confirmed. “I’ve read it in the paper.”

“I myself am somewhat in retard,” Johnson went on. “This is the first
time I have been divorced. I am thirty-five.”

“Mais vous êtes encore jeune,” said the porter. He explained to the two
others. “Monsieur n’a que trente-cinq ans.” The other porters nodded.
“He’s very young,” said one.

“And it is really the first time you’ve been divorced?” asked the
porter.

“Absolutely,” said Johnson. “Please open the wine, mademoiselle.”

“And is it very expensive?”

“Ten thousand francs.”

“Swiss money?”

“No, French money.”

“Oh, yes. Two thousand francs Swiss. All the same it’s not cheap.”

“No.”

“And why does one do it?”

“One is asked to.”

“But why do they ask that?”

“To marry some one else.”

“But it’s idiotic.”

“I agree with you,” said Johnson. The waitress filled the four glasses.
They all raised them.

“Prosit,” said Johnson.

“A votre santé, monsieur,” said the porter. The other two porters said
“Salut.” The champagne tasted like sweet pink cider.

“Is it a system always to respond in a different language in
Switzerland?” Johnson asked.

“No,” said the porter. “French is more cultivated. Besides, this is la
Suisse Romande.”

“But you speak German?”

“Yes. Where I come from they speak German.”

“I see,” said Johnson, “and you say you have never been divorced?”

“No. It would be too expensive. Besides I have never married.”

“Ah,” said Johnson. “And these other gentlemen?”

“They are married.”

“You like being married?” Johnson asked one of the porters.

“What?”

“You like the married state?”

“Oui. C’est normale.”

“Exactly,” said Johnson. “Et vous, monsieur?”

“Ça va,” said the other porter.

“Pour moi,” said Johnson, “ça ne va pas.”

“Monsieur is going to divorce,” the first porter explained.

“Oh,” said the second porter.

“Ah ha,” the third porter said.

“Well,” said Johnson, “the subject seems to be exhausted. You’re not
interested in my troubles,” he addressed the first porter.

“But, yes,” said the porter.

“Well, let’s talk about something else.”

“As you wish.”

“What can we talk about?”

“You do the sport?”

“No,” said Johnson. “My wife does, though.”

“What do you do for amusement?”

“I am a writer.”

“Does that make much money?”

“No. But later on when you get known it does.”

“It is interesting.”

“No,” said Johnson, “it is not interesting. I am sorry, gentlemen, but I
have to leave you. Will you please drink the other bottle?”

“But the train does not come for three quarters of an hour.”

“I know,” said Johnson. The waitress came and he paid for the wine and
his dinner.

“You’re going out, sir?” she asked.

“Yes,” said Johnson, “just for a little walk. I’ll leave my bags here.”

He put on his muffler, his coat, and his hat. Outside the snow was
falling heavily. He looked back through the window at the three porters
sitting at the table. The waitress was filling their glasses from the
last wine of the opened bottle. She took the unopened bottle back to the
bar. That makes them three francs something apiece, Johnson thought. He
turned and walked down the platform. Inside the café he had thought that
talking about it would blunt it; but it had not blunted it; it had only
made him feel nasty.


                                PART III

                 THE SON OF A FELLOW MEMBER AT TERRITET

In the station café at Territet it was a little too warm; the lights
were bright and the tables shiny from polishing. There were baskets with
pretzels in glazed paper sacks on the tables and cardboard pads for beer
glasses in order that the moist glasses would not make rings on the
wood. The chairs were carved but the wooden seats were worn and quite
comfortable. There was a clock on the wall, a bar at the far end of the
room, and outside the window it was snowing. There was an old man
drinking coffee at a table under the clock and reading the evening
paper. A porter came in and said the Simplon-Orient Express was an hour
late at Saint Maurice. The waitress came over to Mr. Harris’s table. Mr.
Harris had just finished dinner.

“The Express is an hour late, sir. Can I bring you some coffee?”

“If you like.”

“Please?” asked the waitress.

“All right,” said Mr. Harris.

“Thank you, sir,” said the waitress.

She brought the coffee from the kitchen and Mr. Harris put sugar in it,
crunched the lumps with his spoon, and looked out the window at the snow
falling in the light from the station platform.

“Do you speak other languages besides English?” he asked the waitress.

“Oh, yes, sir. I speak German and French and the dialects.”

“Which do you like best?”

“They are all very much the same, sir. I can’t say I like one better
than another.”

“Would you like a drink of something or a coffee?”

“Oh, no, sir, it is not permitted to drink in the café with the
clients.”

“You wouldn’t take a cigar?”

“Oh, no, sir,” she laughed. “I don’t smoke, sir.”

“Neither do I,” said Harris, “I don’t agree with David Belasco.”

“Please?”

“Belasco. David Belasco. You can always tell him because he has his
collar on backwards. But I don’t agree with him. Then, too, he’s dead
now.”

“Will you excuse me, sir?” asked the waitress.

“Absolutely,” said Harris. He sat forward in the chair and looked out of
the window. Across the room the old man had folded his paper. He looked
at Mr. Harris and then picked up his coffee cup and saucer and walked to
Harris’s table.

“I beg your pardon if I intrude,” he said in English, “but it has just
occurred to me that you might be a member of the National Geographic
Society.”

“Please sit down,” Harris said. The gentleman sat down.

“Won’t you have another coffee or a liqueur?”

“Thank you,” said the gentleman.

“Won’t you have a kirsch with me?”

“Perhaps. But you must have it with me.”

“No, I insist.” Harris called the waitress. The old gentleman took out
from an inside pocket of his coat a leather pocketbook. He took off a
wide rubber band and drew out several papers, selected one, and handed
it to Harris.

“That is my certificate of membership,” he said. “Do you know Frederick
J. Roussel in America?”

“I’m afraid I don’t.”

“I believe he is very prominent.”

“Where does he come from? Do you know what part of the States?”

“From Washington, of course. Isn’t that the headquarters of the
Society?”

“I believe it is.”

“You believe it is. Aren’t you sure?”

“I’ve been away a long time,” Harris said.

“You’re not a member, then?”

“No. But my father is. He’s been a member for a great many years.”

“Then he would know Frederick J. Roussel. He is one of the officers of
the society. You will observe that it is by Mr. Roussel that I was
nominated for membership.”

“I’m awfully glad.”

“I am sorry you are not a member. But you could obtain nomination
through your father?”

“I think so,” said Harris. “I must when I go back.”

“I would advise you to,” said the gentleman. “You see the magazine, of
course?”

“Absolutely.”

“Have you seen the number with the colored plates of the North American
fauna?”

“Yes. I have it in Paris.”

“And the number containing the panorama of the volcanoes of Alaska?”

“That was a wonder.”

“I enjoyed very much, too, the wild animal photographs of George Shiras
three.”

“They were damned fine.”

“I beg your pardon?”

“They were excellent. That fellow Shiras——”

“You call him that fellow?”

“We’re old friends,” said Harris.

“I see. You know George Shiras three. He must be very interesting.”

“He is. He’s about the most interesting man I know.”

“And do you know George Shiras two? Is he interesting too?”

“Oh, he’s not so interesting.”

“I should imagine he would be very interesting.”

“You know, a funny thing. He’s not so interesting. I’ve often wondered
why.”

“H’m,” said the gentleman. “I should have thought any one in that family
would be interesting.”

“Do you remember the panorama of the Sahara Desert?” Harris asked.

“The Sahara Desert? That was nearly fifteen years ago.”

“That’s right. That was one of my father’s favorites.”

“He doesn’t prefer the newer numbers?”

“He probably does. But he was very fond of the Sahara panorama.”

“It was excellent. But to me its artistic value far exceeded its
scientific interest.”

“I don’t know,” said Harris. “The wind blowing all that sand and that
Arab with his camel kneeling toward Mecca.”

“As I recall, the Arab was standing holding the camel.”

“You’re quite right,” said Harris. “I was thinking of Colonel Lawrence’s
book.”

“Lawrence’s book deals with Arabia, I believe.”

“Absolutely,” said Harris. “It was the Arab reminded me of it.”

“He must be a very interesting young man.”

“I believe he is.”

“Do you know what he is doing now?”

“He’s in the Royal Air Force.”

“And why does he do that?”

“He likes it.”

“Do you know if he belongs to the National Geographic Society?”

“I wonder if he does.”

“He would make a very good member. He is the sort of person they want as
a member. I would be very happy to nominate him if you think they would
like to have him.”

“I think they would.”

“I have nominated a scientist from Vevey and a colleague of mine from
Lauzanne and they were both elected. I believe they would be very
pleased if I nominated Colonel Lawrence.”

“It’s a splendid idea,” said Harris. “Do you come here to the café
often?”

“I come here for coffee after dinner.”

“Are you in the University?”

“I am not active any longer.”

“I’m just waiting for the train,” said Harris. “I’m going up to Paris
and sail from Havre for the States.”

“I have never been to America. But I would like to go very much. Perhaps
I shall attend a meeting of the society some time. I would be very happy
to meet your father.”

“I’m sure he would have liked to meet you but he died last year. Shot
himself, oddly enough.”

“I am very truly sorry. I am sure his loss was a blow to science as well
as to his family.”

“Science took it awfully well.”

“This is my card,” Harris said. “His initials were E. J. instead of E.
D. I know he would have liked to know you.”

“It would have been a great pleasure.” The gentleman took out a card
from the pocketbook and gave it to Harris. It read:

                       DR. SIGISMUND WYER, PH. D.

                   Member of the National Geographic
                  Society, Washington, D. C., U. S. A.

“I will keep it very carefully,” Harris said.




                              A DAY’S WAIT


He came into the room to shut the windows while we were still in bed and
I saw he looked ill. He was shivering, his face was white, and he walked
slowly as though it ached to move.

“What’s the matter, Schatz?”

“I’ve got a headache.”

“You better go back to bed.”

“No. I’m all right.”

“You go to bed. I’ll see you when I’m dressed.”

But when I came downstairs he was dressed, sitting by the fire, looking
a very sick and miserable boy of nine years. When I put my hand on his
forehead I knew he had a fever.

“You go up to bed,” I said, “you’re sick.”

“I’m all right,” he said.

When the doctor came he took the boy’s temperature.

“What is it?” I asked him.

“One hundred and two.”

Downstairs, the doctor left three different medicines in different
colored capsules with instructions for giving them. One was to bring
down the fever, another a purgative, the third to overcome an acid
condition. The germs of influenza can only exist in an acid condition,
he explained. He seemed to know all about influenza and said there was
nothing to worry about if the fever did not go above one hundred and
four degrees. This was a light epidemic of flu and there was no danger
if you avoided pneumonia.

Back in the room I wrote the boy’s temperature down and made a note of
the time to give the various capsules.

“Do you want me to read to you?”

“All right. If you want to,” said the boy. His face was very white and
there were dark areas under his eyes. He lay still in the bed and seemed
very detached from what was going on.

I read aloud from Howard Pyle’s _Book of Pirates_; but I could see he
was not following what I was reading.

“How do you feel, Schatz?” I asked him.

“Just the same, so far,” he said.

I sat at the foot of the bed and read to myself while I waited for it to
be time to give another capsule. It would have been natural for him to
go to sleep, but when I looked up he was looking at the foot of the bed,
looking very strangely.

“Why don’t you try to go to sleep? I’ll wake you up for the medicine.”

“I’d rather stay awake.”

After a while he said to me, “You don’t have to stay in here with me,
Papa, if it bothers you.”

“It doesn’t bother me.”

“No, I mean you don’t have to stay if it’s going to bother you.”

I thought perhaps he was a little lightheaded and after giving him the
prescribed capsules at eleven o’clock I went out for a while. It was a
bright, cold day, the ground covered with a sleet that had frozen so
that it seemed as if all the bare trees, the bushes, the cut brush and
all the grass and the bare ground had been varnished with ice. I took
the young Irish setter for a little walk up the road and along a frozen
creek, but it was difficult to stand or walk on the glassy surface and
the red dog slipped and slithered and I fell twice, hard, once dropping
my gun and having it slide away over the ice.

We flushed a covey of quail under a high clay bank with overhanging
brush and I killed two as they went out of sight over the top of the
bank. Some of the covey lit in trees, but most of them scattered into
brush piles and it was necessary to jump on the ice-coated mounds of
brush several times before they would flush. Coming out while you were
poised unsteadily on the icy, springy brush they made difficult shooting
and I killed two, missed five, and started back pleased to have found a
covey close to the house and happy there were so many left to find on
another day.

At the house they said the boy had refused to let any one come into the
room.

“You can’t come in,” he said. “You mustn’t get what I have.”

I went up to him and found him in exactly the position I had left him,
white-faced, but with the tops of his cheeks flushed by the fever,
staring still, as he had stared, at the foot of the bed.

I took his temperature.

“What is it?”

“Something like a hundred,” I said. It was one hundred and two and four
tenths.

“It was a hundred and two,” he said.

“Who said so?”

“The doctor.”

“Your temperature is all right,” I said. “It’s nothing to worry about.”

“I don’t worry,” he said, “but I can’t keep from thinking.”

“Don’t think,” I said. “Just take it easy.”

“I’m taking it easy,” he said and looked straight ahead. He was
evidently holding tight onto himself about something.

“Take this with water.”

“Do you think it will do any good?”

“Of course it will.”

I sat down and opened the _Pirate_ book and commenced to read, but I
could see he was not following, so I stopped.

“About what time do you think I’m going to die?” he asked.

“What?”

“About how long will it be before I die?”

“You aren’t going to die. What’s the matter with you?”

“Oh, yes, I am. I heard him say a hundred and two.”

“People don’t die with a fever of one hundred and two. That’s a silly
way to talk.”

“I know they do. At school in France the boys told me you can’t live
with forty-four degrees. I’ve got a hundred and two.”

He had been waiting to die all day, ever since nine o’clock in the
morning.

“You poor Schatz,” I said. “Poor old Schatz. It’s like miles and
kilometers. You aren’t going to die. That’s a different thermometer. On
that thermometer thirty-seven is normal. On this kind it’s
ninety-eight.”

“Are you sure?”

“Absolutely,” I said. “It’s like miles and kilometers. You know, like
how many kilometers we make when we do seventy miles in the car?”

“Oh,” he said.

But his gaze at the foot of the bed relaxed slowly. The hold over
himself relaxed too, finally, and the next day it was very slack and he
cried very easily at little things that were of no importance.




                    A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE DEAD[1]


It has always seemed to me that the war has been omitted as a field for
the observations of the naturalist. We have charming and sound accounts
of the flora and fauna of Patagonia by the late W. H. Hudson, the
Reverend Gilbert White has written most interestingly of the Hoopoe on
its occasional and not at all common visits to Selborne, and Bishop
Stanley has given us a valuable, although popular, _Familiar History of
Birds_. Can we not hope to furnish the reader with a few rational and
interesting facts about the dead? I hope so.

When that persevering traveller, Mungo Park, was at one period of his
course fainting in the vast wilderness of an African desert, naked and
alone, considering his days as numbered and nothing appearing to remain
for him to do but to lie down and die, a small moss-flower of
extraordinary beauty caught his eye. “Though the whole plant,” says he,
“was no larger than one of my fingers, I could not contemplate the
delicate conformation of its roots, leaves and capsules without
admiration. Can that Being who planted, watered and brought to
perfection, in this obscure part of the world, a thing which appears of
so small importance, look with unconcern upon the situation and
suffering of creatures formed after his own image? Surely not.
Reflections like these would not allow me to despair; I started up and,
disregarding both hunger and fatigue, travelled forward, assured that
relief was at hand; and I was not disappointed.”

With a disposition to wonder and adore in like manner, as Bishop Stanley
says, can any branch of Natural History be studied without increasing
that faith, love and hope which we also, every one of us, need in our
journey through the wilderness of life? Let us therefore see what
inspiration we may derive from the dead.

In war the dead are usually the male of the human species although this
does not hold true with animals, and I have frequently seen dead mares
among the horses. An interesting aspect of war, too, is that it is only
there that the naturalist has an opportunity to observe the dead of
mules. In twenty years of observation in civil life I had never seen a
dead mule and had begun to entertain doubts as to whether these animals
were really mortal. On rare occasions I had seen what I took to be dead
mules, but on close approach these always proved to be living creatures
who seemed to be dead through their quality of complete repose. But in
war these animals succumb in much the same manner as the more common and
less hardy horse.

Most of those mules that I saw dead were along mountain roads or lying
at the foot of steep declivities whence they had been pushed to rid the
road of their encumbrance. They seemed a fitting enough sight in the
mountains where one was accustomed to their presence and looked less
incongruous there than they did later, at Smyrna, where the Greeks broke
the legs of all their baggage animals and pushed them off the quay into
the shallow water to drown. The numbers of broken-legged mules and
horses drowning in the shallow water called for a Goya to depict them.
Although, speaking literally, one can hardly say that they called for a
Goya since there has only been one Goya, long dead, and it is extremely
doubtful if these animals, were they able to call, would call for
pictorial representation of their plight but, more likely, would, if
they were articulate, call for some one to alleviate their condition.

Regarding the sex of the dead it is a fact that one becomes so
accustomed to the sight of all the dead being men that the sight of a
dead woman is quite shocking. I first saw inversion of the usual sex of
the dead after the explosion of a munition factory which had been
situated in the countryside near Milan, Italy. We drove to the scene of
the disaster in trucks along poplar-shaded roads, bordered with ditches
containing much minute animal life, which I could not clearly observe
because of the great clouds of dust raised by the trucks. Arriving where
the munition plant had been, some of us were put to patrolling about
those large stocks of munitions which for some reason had not exploded,
while others were put at extinguishing a fire which had gotten into the
grass of an adjacent field; which task being concluded, we were ordered
to search the immediate vicinity and surrounding fields for bodies. We
found and carried to an improvised mortuary a good number of these and,
I must admit, frankly, the shock it was to find that these dead were
women rather than men. In those days women had not yet commenced to wear
their hair cut short, as they did later for several years in Europe and
America, and the most disturbing thing, perhaps because it was the most
unaccustomed, was the presence and, even more disturbing, the occasional
absence of this long hair. I remember that after we had searched quite
thoroughly for the complete dead we collected fragments. Many of these
were detached from a heavy, barbed-wire fence which had surrounded the
position of the factory and from the still existent portions of which we
picked many of these detached bits which illustrated only too well the
tremendous energy of high explosive. Many fragments we found a
considerable distance away in the fields, they being carried farther by
their own weight.

On our return to Milan I recall one or two of us discussing the
occurrence and agreeing that the quality of unreality and the fact that
there were no wounded did much to rob the disaster of a horror which
might have been much greater. Also the fact that it had been so
immediate and that the dead were in consequence still as little
unpleasant as possible to carry and deal with made it quite removed from
the usual battlefield experience. The pleasant, though dusty, ride
through the beautiful Lombard countryside also was a compensation for
the unpleasantness of the duty and on our return, while we exchanged
impressions, we all agreed that it was indeed fortunate that the fire
which broke out just before we arrived had been brought under control as
rapidly as it had and before it had attained any of the seemingly huge
stocks of unexploded munitions. We agreed too that the picking up of the
fragments had been an extraordinary business; it being amazing that the
human body should be blown into pieces which exploded along no
anatomical lines, but rather divided as capriciously as the
fragmentation in the burst of a high explosive shell.

A naturalist, to obtain accuracy of observation, may confine himself in
his observations to one limited period and I will take first that
following the Austrian offensive of June, 1918, in Italy as one in which
the dead were present in their greatest numbers, a withdrawal having
been forced and an advance later made to recover the ground lost so that
the positions after the battle were the same as before except for the
presence of the dead. Until the dead are buried they change somewhat in
appearance each day. The color change in Caucasian races is from white
to yellow, to yellow-green, to black. If left long enough in the heat
the flesh comes to resemble coal-tar, especially where it has been
broken or torn, and it has quite a visible tarlike iridescence. The dead
grow larger each day until sometimes they become quite too big for their
uniforms, filling these until they seem blown tight enough to burst. The
individual members may increase in girth to an unbelievable extent and
faces fill as taut and globular as balloons. The surprising thing, next
to their progressive corpulence, is the amount of paper that is
scattered about the dead. Their ultimate position, before there is any
question of burial, depends on the location of the pockets in the
uniform. In the Austrian army these pockets were in the back of the
breeches and the dead, after a short time, all consequently lay on their
faces, the two hip pockets pulled out and, scattered around them in the
grass, all those papers their pockets had contained. The heat, the
flies, the indicative positions of the bodies in the grass, and the
amount of paper scattered are the impressions one retains. The smell of
a battlefield in hot weather one cannot recall. You can remember that
there was such a smell, but nothing ever happens to you to bring it
back. It is unlike the smell of a regiment, which may come to you
suddenly while riding in the street car and you will look across and see
the man who has brought it to you. But the other thing is gone as
completely as when you have been in love; you remember things that
happened, but the sensation cannot be recalled.

One wonders what that persevering traveller, Mungo Park, would have seen
on a battlefield in hot weather to restore his confidence. There were
always poppies in the wheat in the end of June and in July, and the
mulberry trees were in full leaf and one could see the heat waves rise
from the barrels of the guns where the sun struck them through the
screens of leaves; the earth was turned a bright yellow at the edge of
holes where mustard gas shells had been and the average broken house is
finer to see than one that has never been shelled, but few travellers
would take a good full breath of that early summer air and have any such
thoughts as Mungo Park about those formed in His own image.

The first thing that you found about the dead was that, hit badly
enough, they died like animals. Some quickly from a little wound you
would not think would kill a rabbit. They died from little wounds as
rabbits die sometimes from three or four small grains of shot that
hardly seem to break the skin. Others would die like cats; a skull
broken in and iron in the brain, they lie alive two days like cats that
crawl into the coal bin with a bullet in the brain and will not die
until you cut their heads off. Maybe cats do not die then, they say they
have nine lives, I do not know, but most men die like animals, not men.
I’d never seen a natural death, so called, and so I blamed it on the war
and like the persevering traveller, Mungo Park, knew that there was
something else, that always absent something else, and then I saw one.

The only natural death I’ve ever seen, outside of loss of blood, which
isn’t bad, was death from Spanish influenza. In this you drown in mucus,
choking, and how you know the patient’s dead is: at the end he turns to
be a little child again, though with his manly force, and fills the
sheets as full as any diaper with one vast, final, yellow cataract that
flows and dribbles on after he’s gone. So now I want to see the death of
any self-called Humanist[2] because a persevering traveller like Mungo
Park or me lives on and maybe yet will live to see the actual death of
members of this literary sect and watch the noble exits that they make.
In my musings as a naturalist it has occurred to me that while decorum
is an excellent thing some must be indecorous if the race is to be
carried on since the position prescribed for procreation is indecorous,
highly indecorous, and it occurred to me that perhaps that is what these
people are, or were: the children of decorous cohabitation. But
regardless of how they started I hope to see the finish of a few, and
speculate how worms will try that long preserved sterility; with their
quaint pamphlets gone to bust and into foot-notes all their lust.

While it is, perhaps, legitimate to deal with these self-designated
citizens in a natural history of the dead, even though the designation
may mean nothing by the time this work is published, yet it is unfair to
the other dead, who were not dead in their youth of choice, who owned no
magazines, many of whom had doubtless never even read a review, that one
has seen in the hot weather with a half-pint of maggots working where
their mouths have been. It was not always hot weather for the dead, much
of the time it was the rain that washed them clean when they lay in it
and made the earth soft when they were buried in it and sometimes then
kept on until the earth was mud and washed them out and you had to bury
them again. Or in the winter in the mountains you had to put them in the
snow and when the snow melted in the spring some one else had to bury
them. They had beautiful burying grounds in the mountains, war in the
mountains is the most beautiful of all war, and in one of them, at a
place called Pocol, they buried a general who was shot through the head
by a sniper. This is where those writers are mistaken who write books
called _Generals Die in Bed_, because this general died in a trench dug
in snow, high in the mountains, wearing an Alpini hat with an eagle
feather in it and a hole in front you couldn’t put your little finger in
and a hole in back you could put your fist in, if it were a small fist
and you wanted to put it there, and much blood in the snow. He was a
damned fine general, and so was General von Behr who commanded the
Bavarian Alpenkorps troops at the battle of Caporetto and was killed in
his staff car by the Italian rearguard as he drove into Udine ahead of
his troops, and the titles of all such books should be _Generals Usually
Die in Bed_, if we are to have any sort of accuracy in such things.

In the mountains too, sometimes, the snow fell on the dead outside the
dressing station on the side that was protected by the mountain from any
shelling. They carried them into a cave that had been dug into the
mountainside before the earth froze. It was in this cave that a man
whose head was broken as a flower-pot may be broken, although it was all
held together by membranes and a skillfully applied bandage now soaked
and hardened, with the structure of his brain disturbed by a piece of
broken steel in it, lay a day, a night, and a day. The stretcher-bearers
asked the doctor to go in and have a look at him. They saw him each time
they made a trip and even when they did not look at him they heard him
breathing. The doctor’s eyes were red and the lids swollen, almost shut
from tear gas. He looked at the man twice; once in daylight, once with a
flashlight. That too would have made a good etching for Goya, the visit
with the flashlight, I mean. After looking at him the second time the
doctor believed the stretcher-bearers when they said the soldier was
still alive.

“What do you want me to do about it?” he asked.

There was nothing they wanted done. But after a while they asked
permission to carry him out and lay him with the badly wounded.

“No. No. No!” said the doctor, who was busy. “What’s the matter? Are you
afraid of him?”

“We don’t like to hear him in there with the dead.”

“Don’t listen to him. If you take him out of there you will have to
carry him right back in.”

“We wouldn’t mind that, Captain Doctor.”

“No,” said the doctor. “No. Didn’t you hear me say no?”

“Why don’t you give him an overdose of morphine?” asked an artillery
officer who was waiting to have a wound in his arm dressed.

“Do you think that is the only use I have for morphine? Would you like
me to have to operate without morphine? You have a pistol, go out and
shoot him yourself.”

“He’s been shot already,” said the officer. “If some of you doctors were
shot you’d be different.”

“Thank you very much,” said the doctor waving a forceps in the air.
“Thank you a thousand times. What about these eyes?” He pointed the
forceps at them. “How would you like these?”

“Tear gas. We call it lucky if it’s tear gas.”

“Because you leave the line,” said the doctor. “Because you come running
here with your tear gas to be evacuated. You rub onions in your eyes.”

“You are beside yourself. I do not notice your insults. You are crazy.”

The stretcher-bearers came in.

“Captain Doctor,” one of them said.

“Get out of here!” said the doctor.

They went out.

“I will shoot the poor fellow,” the artillery officer said. “I am a
humane man. I will not let him suffer.”

“Shoot him then,” said the doctor. “Shoot him. Assume the
responsibility. I will make a report. Wounded shot by lieutenant of
artillery in first curing post. Shoot him. Go ahead shoot him.”

“You are not a human being.”

“My business is to care for the wounded, not to kill them. That is for
gentlemen of the artillery.”

“Why don’t you care for him then?”

“I have done so. I have done all that can be done.”

“Why don’t you send him down on the cable railway?”

“Who are you to ask me questions? Are you my superior officer? Are you
in command of this dressing post? Do me the courtesy to answer.”

The lieutenant of artillery said nothing. The others in the room were
all soldiers and there were no other officers present.

“Answer me,” said the doctor holding a needle up in his forceps. “Give
me a response.”

“F—— yourself,” said the artillery officer.

“So,” said the doctor. “So, you said that. All right. All right. We
shall see.”

The lieutenant of artillery stood up and walked toward him.

“F—— yourself,” he said. “F—— yourself. F—— your mother. F——
your sister. . . .”

The doctor tossed the saucer full of iodine in his face. As he came
toward him, blinded, the lieutenant fumbled for his pistol. The doctor
skipped quickly behind him, tripped him and, as he fell to the floor,
kicked him several times and picked up the pistol in his rubber gloves.
The lieutenant sat on the floor holding his good hand to his eyes.

“I’ll kill you!” he said. “I’ll kill you as soon as I can see.”

“I am the boss,” said the doctor. “All is forgiven since you know I am
the boss. You cannot kill me because I have your pistol. Sergeant!
Adjutant! Adjutant!”

“The adjutant is at the cable railway,” said the sergeant.

“Wipe out this officer’s eyes with alcohol and water. He has got iodine
in them. Bring me the basin to wash my hands. I will take this officer
next.”

“You won’t touch me.”

“Hold him tight. He is a little delirious.”

One of the stretcher-bearers came in.

“Captain Doctor.”

“What do you want?”

“The man in the dead-house——”

“Get out of here.”

“Is dead, Captain Doctor. I thought you would be glad to know.”

“See, my poor lieutenant? We dispute about nothing. In time of war we
dispute about nothing.”

“F—— you,” said the lieutenant of artillery. He still could not see.
“You’ve blinded me.”

“It is nothing,” said the doctor. “Your eyes will be all right. It is
nothing. A dispute about nothing.”

“Ayee! Ayee! Ayee!” suddenly screamed the lieutenant. “You have blinded
me! You have blinded me!”

“Hold him tight,” said the doctor. “He is in much pain. Hold him very
tight.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

[1] This story was published in a rather technical book called _Death in
the Afternoon_, which sold, or rather was offered for sale, at $3.50. It
is reprinted here in case any one not caring to spend that appreciable
sum for a rather technical book should care to read it.

[2] The reader’s indulgence is requested for this mention of an extinct
phenomenon. The reference, like all references to fashions, dates the
story but it is retained because of its mild historical interest and
because its omission would spoil the rhythm.




                            WINE OF WYOMING


It was a hot afternoon in Wyoming; the mountains were a long way away
and you could see snow on their tops, but they made no shadow, and in
the valley the grain-fields were yellow, the road was dusty with cars
passing, and all the small wooden houses at the edge of town were baking
in the sun. There was a tree made shade over Fontan’s back porch and I
sat there at a table and Madame Fontan brought up cold beer from the
cellar. A motor-car turned off the main road and came up the side road,
and stopped beside the house. Two men got out and came in through the
gate. I put the bottles under the table. Madame Fontan stood up.

“Where’s Sam?” one of the men asked at the screen door.

“He ain’t here. He’s at the mines.”

“You got some beer?”

“No. Ain’t got any beer. That’s a last bottle. All gone.”

“What’s he drinking?”

“That’s a last bottle. All gone.”

“Go on, give us some beer. You know me.”

“Ain’t got any beer. That’s a last bottle. All gone.”

“Come on, let’s go some place where we can get some real beer,” one of
them said, and they went out to the car. One of them walked unsteadily.
The motor-car jerked in starting, whirled on the road, and went on and
away.

“Put the beer on the table,” Madame Fontan said. “What’s the matter,
yes, all right. What’s the matter? Don’t drink off the floor.”

“I didn’t know who they were,” I said.

“They’re drunk,” she said. “That’s what makes the trouble. Then they go
somewhere else and say they got it here. Maybe they don’t even
remember.” She spoke French, but it was only French occasionally, and
there were many English words and some English constructions.

“Where’s Fontan?”

“Il fait de la vendange. Oh, my God, il est crazy pour le vin.”

“But you like the beer?”

“Oui, j’aime la bière, mais Fontan, il est crazy pour le vin.”

She was a plump old woman with a lovely ruddy complexion and white hair.
She was very clean and the house was very clean and neat. She came from
Lens.

“Where did you eat?”

“At the hotel.”

“Mangez ici. Il ne faut pas manger à l’hôtel ou au restaurant. Mangez
ici!”

“I don’t want to make you trouble. And besides they eat all right at the
hotel.”

“I never eat at the hotel. Maybe they eat all right there. Only once in
my life I ate at a restaurant in America. You know what they gave me?
They gave me pork that was raw!”

“Really?”

“I don’t lie to you. It was pork that wasn’t cooked! Et mon fils il est
marié avec une américaine, et tout le temps il a mangé les _beans_ en
_can_.”

“How long has he been married?”

“Oh, my God, I don’t know. His wife weighs two hundred twenty-five
pounds. She don’t work. She don’t cook. She gives him beans en can.”

“What does she do?”

“All the time she reads. Rien que des books. Tout le temps elle stay in
the bed and read books. Already she can’t have another baby. She’s too
fat. There ain’t any room.”

“What’s the matter with her?”

“She reads books all the time. He’s a good boy. He works hard. He worked
in the mines; now he works on a ranch. He never worked on a ranch
before, and the man that owns the ranch said to Fontan that he never saw
anybody work better on that ranch than that boy. Then he comes home and
she feeds him nothing.”

“Why doesn’t he get a divorce?”

“He ain’t got no money to get a divorce. Besides, il est _crazy_ pour
elle.”

“Is she beautiful?”

“He thinks _so_. When he brought her home I thought I would die. He’s
such a good boy and works hard all the time and never run around or make
any trouble. Then he goes away to work in the oil-fields and brings home
this Indienne that weighs right then one hundred eighty-five pounds.”

“Elle est Indienne?”

“She’s Indian all right. My God, yes. All the time she says sonofabitsh
goddam. She don’t work.”

“Where is she now?”

“Au show.”

“Where’s that?”

“_Au show. Moving_ pictures. All she does is read and go to the show.”

“Have you got any more beer?”

“My God, yes. Sure. You come and eat with us tonight.”

“All right. What should I bring?”

“Don’t bring anything. Nothing at all. Maybe Fontan will have some of
the wine.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

That night I had dinner at Fontan’s. We ate in the dining-room and there
was a clean tablecloth. We tried the new wine. It was very light and
clear and good, and still tasted of the grapes. At the table there were
Fontan and Madame and the little boy, André.

“What did you do today?” Fontan asked. He was an old man with small
mine-tired body, a drooping gray mustache, and bright eyes, and was from
the Centre near Saint-Etienne.

“I worked on my book.”

“Were your books all right?” asked Madame.

“He means he writes a book like a writer. Un roman,” Fontan explained.

“Pa, can I go to the show?” André asked.

“Sure,” said Fontan. André turned to me.

“How old do you think I am? Do you think I look fourteen years old?” He
was a thin little boy, but his face looked sixteen.

“Yes. You look fourteen.”

“When I go to the show I crouch down like this and try to look small.”
His voice was very high and breaking. “If I give them a quarter they
keep it all but if I give them only fifteen cents they let me in all
right.”

“I only give you fifteen cents, then,” said Fontan.

“No. Give me the whole quarter. I’ll get it changed on the way.”

“Il faut revenir tout de suite après le show,” Madame Fontan said.

“I come right back.” André went out the door. The night was cooling
outside. He left the door open and a cool breeze came in.

“Mangez!” said Madame Fontan. “You haven’t eaten anything.” I had eaten
two helpings of chicken and French fried potatoes, three ears of sweet
corn, some sliced cucumbers, and two helpings of salad.

“Perhaps he wants some kek,” Fontan said.

“I should have gotten some kek for him,” Madame Fontan said. “Mangez du
fromage. Mangez du crimcheez. Vous n’avez rien mangé. I ought have
gotten kek. Americans always eat kek.”

“Mais j’ai rudement bien mangé.”

“Mangez! Vous n’avez rien mangé. Eat it all. We don’t save anything. Eat
it all up.”

“Eat some more salad,” Fontan said.

“I’ll get some more beer,” Madame Fontan said. “If you work all day in a
book-factory you get hungry.”

“Elle ne comprend pas que vous êtes écrivain,” Fontan said. He was a
delicate old man who used the slang and knew the popular songs of his
period of military service in the end of the 1890’s. “He writes the
books himself,” he explained to Madame.

“You write the books yourself?” Madame asked.

“Sometimes.”

“Oh!” she said. “Oh! You write them yourself. Oh! Well, you get hungry
if you do that too. Mangez! Je vais chercher de la bière.”

We heard her walking on the stairs to the cellar. Fontan smiled at me.
He was very tolerant of people who had not his experience and worldly
knowledge.

When André came home from the show we were still sitting in the kitchen
and were talking about hunting.

“Labor _day_ we all went to Clear Creek,” Madame said. “Oh, my God, you
ought to have been there all right. We all went in the truck. Tout le
monde est allé dans le truck. Nous sommes partis le dimanche. C’est le
truck de Charley.”

“On a mangé, on a bu du vin, de la bière, et il y avait aussi un
français qui a apporté de l’absinthe,” Fontan said. “Un français de la
Californie!”

“My God, nous avons chanté. There’s a farmer comes to see what’s the
matter, and we give him something to drink, and he stayed with us
awhile. There was some Italians come too, and they want to stay with us
too. We sung a song about the Italians and they don’t understand it.
They didn’t know we didn’t want them, but we didn’t have nothing to do
with them, and after a while they went away.”

“How many fish did you catch?”

“Très peu. We went to fish a little while, but then we came back to sing
again. Nous avons chanté, vous savez.”

“In the night,” said Madame, “toutes les femmes dort dans le truck. Les
hommes à côté du feu. In the night I hear Fontan come to get some more
wine, and I tell him, Fontan, my God, leave some for tomorrow. Tomorrow
they won’t have anything to drink, and then they’ll be sorry.”

“Mais nous avons tout bu,” Fontan said. “Et le lendemain il ne reste
rien.”

“What did you do?”

“Nous avons pêché sérieusement.”

“Good trout, all right, too. My God, yes. All the same; half-pound one
ounce.”

“How big?”

“Half-pound one ounce. Just right to eat. All the same size; half-pound
one ounce.”

“How do you like America?” Fontan asked me.

“It’s my country, you see. So I like it, because it’s my country. Mais
on ne mange pas très bien. D’antan, oui. Mais maintenant, no.”

“No,” said Madame. “On ne mange pas bien.” She shook her head. “Et
aussi, il y a trop de Polack. Quand j’étais petite ma mère m’a dit,
‘vous mangez comme les Polacks.’ Je n’ai jamais compris ce que c’est
qu’un Polack. Mais maintenant en Amérique je comprends. Il y a trop de
Polack. Et, my God, ils sont sales, les Polacks.”

“It is fine for hunting and fishing,” I said.

“Oui. Ça, c’est le meilleur. La chasse et la pêche,” Fontan said.
“Qu’est-ce que vous avez comme fusil?”

“A twelve-gauge pump.”

“Il est bon, le pump,” Fontan nodded his head.

“Je veux aller à la chasse moi-même,” André said in his high, little
boy’s voice.

“Tu ne peux pas,” Fontan said. He turned to me.

“Ils sont des sauvages, les boys, vous savez. Ils sont des sauvages. Ils
veulent shooter les uns les autres.”

“Je veux aller tout seul,” André said, very shrill and excited.

“You can’t go,” Madame Fontan said. “You are too young.”

“Je veux aller tout seul,” André said shrilly. “Je veux shooter les rats
d’eau.”

“What are rats d’eau?” I asked.

“You don’t know them? Sure you know them. What they call the muskrats.”

André had brought the twenty-two-calibre rifle out from the cupboard and
was holding it in his hands under the light.

“Ils sont des sauvages,” Fontan explained. “Ils veulent shooter les uns
les autres.”

“Je veux aller tout seul,” André shrilled. He looked desperately along
the barrel of the gun. “Je veux shooter les rats d’eau. Je connais
beaucoup de rats d’eau.”

“Give me the gun,” Fontan said. He explained again to me. “They’re
savages. They would shoot one another.”

André held tight on to the gun.

“On peut looker. On ne fait pas de mal. On peut looker.”

“Il est crazy pour le shooting,” Madame Fontan said. “Mais il est trop
jeune.”

André put the twenty-two-calibre rifle back in the cupboard.

“When I’m bigger I’ll shoot the muskrats and the jack-rabbits too,” he
said in English. “One time I went out with papa and he shot a
jack-rabbit just a little bit and I shot it and hit it.”

“C’est vrai,” Fontan nodded. “Il a tué un jack.”

“But he hit it first,” André said. “I want to go all by myself and shoot
all by myself. Next year I can do it.” He went over in a corner and sat
down to read a book. I had picked it up when we came into the kitchen to
sit after supper. It was a library book—_Frank on a Gunboat_.

“Il aime les books,” Madame Fontan said. “But it’s better than to run
around at night with the other boys and steal things.”

“Books are all right,” Fontan said. “Monsieur il fait les books.”

“Yes, that’s so, all right. But too many books are bad,” Madame Fontan
said. “Ici, c’est une maladie, les books. C’est comme les churches. Ici
il y a trop de churches. En France il y a seulement les catholiques et
les protestants—et très peu de protestants. Mais ici rien que de
churches. Quand j’étais venu ici je disais, oh, my God, what are all the
churches?”

“C’est vrai,” Fontan said. “Il y a trop de churches.”

“The other day,” Madame Fontan said, “there was a little French girl
here with her mother, the cousin of Fontan, and she said to me, ‘En
Amérique il ne faut pas être catholique. It’s not good to be catholique.
The Americans don’t like you to be catholique. It’s like the dry law.’ I
said to her, ‘What you going to be? Heh? It’s better to be catholique if
you’re catholique.’ But she said, ‘No, it isn’t any good to be
catholique in America.’ But I think it’s better to be catholique if you
are. Ce n’est pas bon de changer sa religion. My God, no.”

“You go to the mass here?”

“No. I don’t go in America, only sometimes in a long while. Mais je
reste catholique. It’s no good to change the religion.”

“On dit que Schmidt est catholique,” Fontan said.

“On dit, mais on ne sait jamais,” Madame Fontan said. “I don’t think
Schmidt is catholique. There’s not many catholique in America.”

“We are catholique,” I said.

“Sure, but you live in France,” Madame Fontan said. “Je ne crois pas que
Schmidt est catholique. Did he ever live in France?”

“Les Polacks sont catholiques,” Fontan said.

“That’s true,” Madame Fontan said. “They go to church, then they fight
with knives all the way home and kill each other all day Sunday. But
they’re not real catholiques. They’re Polack catholiques.”

“All catholiques are the same,” Fontan said. “One catholique is like
another.”

“I don’t believe Schmidt is catholique,” Madame Fontan said. “That’s
awful funny if he’s catholique. Moi, je ne crois pas.”

“Il est catholique,” I said.

“Schmidt is catholique,” Madame Fontan mused. “I wouldn’t have believed
it. My God, il est catholique.”

“Marie va chercher de la bière,” Fontan said. “Monsieur a soif—moi
aussi.”

“Yes, all right,” Madame Fontan said from the next room. She went
downstairs and we heard the stairs creaking. André sat reading in the
corner. Fontan and I sat at the table, and he poured the beer from the
last bottle into our two glasses, leaving a little in the bottom.

“C’est un bon pays pour la chasse,” Fontan said. “J’aime beaucoup
shooter les canards.”

“Mais il y a très bonne chasse aussi en France,” I said.

“C’est vrai,” Fontan said. “Nous avons beaucoup de gibier là-bas.”

Madame Fontan came up the stairs with the beer bottles in her hands. “Il
est catholique,” she said. “My God, Schmidt est catholique.”

“You think he’ll be the President?” Fontan asked.

“No,” I said.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The next afternoon I drove out to Fontan’s, through the shade of the
town, then along the dusty road, turning up the side road and leaving
the car beside the fence. It was another hot day. Madame Fontan came to
the back door. She looked like Mrs. Santa Claus, clean and rosy-faced
and white-haired, and waddling when she walked.

“My God, hello,” she said. “It’s hot, my God.” She went back into the
house to get some beer. I sat on the back porch and looked through the
screen and the leaves of the tree at the heat and, away off, the
mountains. There were furrowed brown mountains, and above them three
peaks and a glacier with snow that you could see through the trees. The
snow looked very white and pure and unreal. Madame Fontan came out and
put down the bottles on the table.

“What you see out there?”

“The snow.”

“C’est joli, la neige.”

“Have a glass, too.”

“All right.”

She sat down on a chair beside me. “Schmidt,” she said. “If he’s the
President, you think we get the wine and beer all right?”

“Sure,” I said. “Trust Schmidt.”

“Already we paid seven hundred fifty-five dollars in fines when they
arrested Fontan. Twice the police arrested us and once the governments.
All the money we made all the time Fontan worked in the mines and I did
washing. We paid it all. They put Fontan in jail. Il n’a jamais fait de
mal à personne.”

“He’s a good man,” I said. “It’s a crime.”

“We don’t charge too much money. The wine one dollar a litre. The beer
ten cents a bottle. We never sell the beer before it’s good. Lots of
places they sell the beer right away when they make it, and then it
gives everybody a headache. What’s the matter with that? They put Fontan
in jail and they take seven hundred fifty-five dollars.”

“It’s wicked,” I said. “Where is Fontan?”

“He stays with the wine. He has to watch it now to catch it just right,”
she smiled. She did not think about the money any more. “Vous savez, il
est crazy pour le vin. Last night he brought a little bit home with him,
what you drank, and a little bit of the new. The last new. It ain’t
ready yet, but he drank a little bit, and this morning he put a little
bit in his coffee. Dans son café, vous savez! Il est crazy pour le vin!
Il est comme ça. Son pays est comme ça. Where I live in the north they
don’t drink any wine. Everybody drinks beer. By where we lived there was
a big brewery right near us. When I was a little girl I didn’t like the
smell of the hops in the carts. Nor in the fields. Je n’aime pas les
houblons. No, my God, not a bit. The man that owns the brewery said to
me and my sister to go to the brewery and drink the beer, and then we’d
like the hops. That’s true. Then we liked them all right. He had them
give us the beer. We liked them all right then. But Fontan, il est crazy
pour le vin. One time he killed a jack-rabbit and he wanted me to cook
it with a sauce with wine, make a black sauce with wine and butter and
mushrooms and onion and everything in it, for the jack. My God, I make
the sauce all right, and he eat it all and said, ‘La sauce est meilleure
que le jack.’ Dans son pays c’est comme ça. Il y a beaucoup de gibier et
de vin. Moi, j’aime les pommes de terre, le saucisson, et la bière.
C’est bon, la bière. C’est très bon pour la santé.”

“It’s good,” I said. “It and wine too.”

“You’re like Fontan. But there was a thing here that I never saw. I
don’t think you’ve ever seen it either. There were Americans came here
and they put whiskey in the beer.”

“No,” I said.

“Oui. My God, yes, that’s true. Et aussi une femme qui a vomis sur la
table!”

“Comment?”

“C’est vrai. Elle a vomis sur la table. Et après elle a vomis dans ses
shoes. And afterward they come back and say they want to come again and
have another party the next Saturday, and I say no, my God, no! When
they came I locked the door.”

“They’re bad when they’re drunk.”

“In the winter-time when the boys go to the dance they come in the cars
and wait outside and say to Fontan, ‘Hey, Sam, sell us a bottle wine,’
or they buy the beer, and then they take the moonshine out of their
pockets in a bottle and pour it in the beer and drink it. My God, that’s
the first time I ever saw that in my life. They put whiskey in the beer.
My God, I don’t understand _that_!”

“They want to get sick, so they’ll know they’re drunk.”

“One time a fellow comes here came to me and said he wanted me to cook
them a big supper and they drink one two bottles of wine, and their
girls come too, and then they go to the dance. All right, I said. So I
made a big supper, and when they come already they drank a lot. Then
they put whiskey in the wine. My God, yes. I said to Fontan, ‘On va être
malade!’ ‘Oui,’ il dit. Then these girls were sick, nice girls too,
all-right girls. They were sick right at the table. Fontan tried to take
them by the arm and show them where they could be sick all right in the
cabinet, but the fellows said no, they were all right right there at the
table.”

Fontan had come in. “When they come again I locked the door. ‘No,’ I
said. ‘Not for hundred fifty dollars.’ My God, no.”

“There is a word for such people when they do like that, in French,”
Fontan said. He stood looking very old and tired from the heat.

“What?”

“Cochon,” he said delicately, hesitating to use such a strong word.
“They were like the cochon. C’est un mot très fort,” he apologized,
“mais vomir sur la table—” he shook his head sadly.

“Cochons,” I said. “That’s what they are—cochons. Salauds.”

The grossness of the words was distasteful to Fontan. He was glad to
speak of something else.

“Il y a des gens très gentils, très sensibles, qui viennent aussi,” he
said. “There are officers from the fort. Very nice men. Good fellas.
Everybody that was ever in France they want to come and drink wine. They
like wine all right.”

“There was one man,” Madame Fontan said, “and his wife never lets him
get out. So he tells her he’s tired, and goes to bed, and when she goes
to the show he comes straight down here, sometimes in his pyjamas just
with a coat over them. ‘Maria, some beer,’ he says, ‘for God’s sake.’ He
sits in his pyjamas and drinks the beer, and then he goes up to the fort
and gets back in bed before his wife comes home from the show.”

“C’est un original,” Fontan said, “mais vraiment gentil. He’s a nice
fella.”

“My God, yes, nice fella all right,” Madame Fontan said. “He’s always in
bed when his wife gets back from the show.”

“I have to go away tomorrow,” I said. “To the Crow Reservation. We go
there for the opening of the prairie-chicken season.”

“Yes? You come back here before you go away. You come back here all
right?”

“Absolutely.”

“Then the wine will be done,” Fontan said. “We’ll drink a bottle
together.”

“Three bottles,” Madame Fontan said.

“I’ll be back,” I said.

“We count on you,” Fontan said.

“Good night,” I said.

                 *        *        *        *        *

We got in early in the afternoon from the shooting-trip. We had been up
that morning since five o’clock. The day before we had had good
shooting, but that morning we had not seen a prairie-chicken. Riding in
the open car, we were very hot and we stopped to eat our lunch out of
the sun, under a tree beside the road. The sun was high and the patch of
shade was very small. We ate sandwiches and crackers with sandwich
filling on them, and were thirsty and tired, and glad when we finally
were out and on the main road back to town. We came up behind a
prairie-dog town and stopped the car to shoot at the prairie-dogs with
the pistol. We shot two, but then stopped, because the bullets that
missed glanced off the rocks and the dirt, and sung off across the
fields, and beyond the fields there were some trees along a watercourse,
with a house, and we did not want to get in trouble from stray bullets
going toward the house. So we drove on, and finally were on the road
coming down-hill toward the outlying houses of the town. Across the
plain we could see the mountains. They were blue that day, and the snow
on the high mountains shone like glass. The summer was ending, but the
new snow had not yet come to stay on the high mountains; there was only
the old sun-melted snow and the ice, and from a long way away it shone
very brightly.

We wanted something cool and some shade. We were sunburned and our lips
blistered from the sun and alkali dust. We turned up the side road to
Fontan’s, stopped the car outside the house, and went in. It was cool
inside the dining-room. Madame Fontan was alone.

“Only two bottles beer,” she said. “It’s all gone. The new is no good
yet.”

I gave her some birds. “That’s good,” she said. “All right. Thanks.
That’s good.” She went out to put the birds away where it was cooler.
When we finished the beer I stood up. “We have to go,” I said.

“You come back tonight all right? Fontan he’s going to have the wine.”

“We’ll come back before we go away.”

“You go away?”

“Yes. We have to leave in the morning.”

“That’s too bad you go away. You come tonight. Fontan will have the
wine. We’ll make a fête before you go.”

“We’ll come before we go.”

But that afternoon there were telegrams to send, the car to be gone
over,—a tire had been cut by a stone and needed vulcanizing,—and,
without the car, I walked into the town, doing things that had to be
done before we could go. When it was supper-time I was too tired to go
out. We did not want a foreign language. All we wanted was to go early
to bed.

As I lay in bed before I went to sleep, with all the things of the
summer piled around ready to be packed, the windows open and the air
coming in cool from the mountains, I thought it was a shame not to have
gone to Fontan’s—but in a little while I was asleep. The next day we
were busy all morning packing and ending the summer. We had lunch and
were ready to start by two o’clock.

“We must go and say good-by to the Fontans,” I said.

“Yes, we must.”

“I’m afraid they expected us last night.”

“I suppose we could have gone.”

“I wish we’d gone.”

We said good-by to the man at the desk at the hotel, and to Larry and
our other friends in the town, and then drove out to Fontan’s. Both
Monsieur and Madame were there. They were glad to see us. Fontan looked
old and tired.

“We thought you would come last night,” Madame Fontan said. “Fontan had
three bottles of wine. When you did not come he drank it all up.”

“We can only stay a minute,” I said. “We just came to say good-by. We
wanted to come last night. We intended to come, but we were too tired
after the trip.”

“Go get some wine,” Fontan said.

“There is no wine. You drank it all up.”

Fontan looked very upset.

“I’ll go get some,” he said. “I’ll just be gone a few minutes. I drank
it up last night. We had it for you.”

“I knew you were tired. ‘My God,’ I said, ‘they’re too tired all right
to come,’” Madame Fontan said. “Go get some wine, Fontan.”

“I’ll take you in the car,” I said.

“All right,” Fontan said. “That way we’ll go faster.”

We drove down the road in the motor-car and turned up a side road about
a mile away.

“You’ll like that wine,” Fontan said. “It’s come out well. You can drink
it for supper tonight.”

We stopped in front of a frame house. Fontan knocked on the door. There
was no answer. We went around to the back. The back door was locked too.
There were empty tin cans around the back door. We looked in the window.
There was nobody inside. The kitchen was dirty and sloppy, but all the
doors and windows were tight shut.

“That son of a bitch. Where is she gone out?” Fontan said. He was
desperate.

“I know where I can get a key,” he said. “You stay here.” I watched him
go down to the next house down the road, knock on the door, talk to the
woman who came out, and finally come back. He had a key. We tried it on
the front door and the back, but it wouldn’t work.

“That son of a bitch,” Fontan said. “She’s gone away somewhere.”

Looking through the window I could see where the wine was stored. Close
to the window you could smell the inside of the house. It smelled sweet
and sickish like an Indian house. Suddenly Fontan took a loose board and
commenced digging at the earth beside the back door.

“I can get in,” he said. “Son of a bitch, I can get in.”

There was a man in the back yard of the next house doing something to
one of the front wheels of an old Ford.

“You better not,” I said. “That man will see you. He’s watching.”

Fontan straightened up. “We’ll try the key once more,” he said. We tried
the key and it did not work. It turned half-way in either direction.

“We can’t get in,” I said. “We better go back.”

“I’ll dig up the back,” Fontan offered.

“No, I wouldn’t let you take the chance.”

“I’ll do it.”

“No,” I said. “That man would see. Then they would seize it.”

We went out to the car and drove back to Fontan’s, stopping on the way
to leave the key. Fontan did not say anything but swear in English. He
was incoherent and crushed. We went in the house.

“That son of a bitch!” he said. “We couldn’t get the wine. My own wine
that I made.”

All the happiness went from Madame Fontan’s face. Fontan sat down in a
corner with his head in his hands.

“We must go,” I said. “It doesn’t make any difference about the wine.
You drink to us when we’re gone.”

“Where did that crazy go?” Madame Fontan asked.

“I don’t know,” Fontan said. “I don’t know where she go. Now you go away
without any wine.”

“That’s all right,” I said.

“That’s no good,” Madame Fontan said. She shook her head.

“We have to go,” I said. “Good-by and good luck. Thank you for the fine
times.”

Fontan shook his head. He was disgraced. Madame Fontan looked sad.

“Don’t feel bad about the wine,” I said.

“He wanted you to drink his wine,” Madame Fontan said. “You can come
back next year?”

“No. Maybe the year after.”

“You see?” Fontan said to her.

“Good-by,” I said. “Don’t think about the wine. Drink some for us when
we’re gone.” Fontan shook his head. He did not smile. He knew when he
was ruined.

“That son of a bitch,” Fontan said to himself.

“Last night he had three bottles,” Madame Fontan said to comfort him. He
shook his head.

“Good-by,” he said.

Madame Fontan had tears in her eyes.

“Good-by,” she said. She felt badly for Fontan.

“Good-by,” we said. We all felt very badly. They stood in the doorway
and we got in, and I started the motor. We waved. They stood together
sadly on the porch. Fontan looked very old, and Madame Fontan looked
sad. She waved to us and Fontan went in the house. We turned up the
road.

“They felt so badly. Fontan felt terribly.”

“We ought to have gone last night.”

“Yes, we ought to have.”

We were through the town and out on the smooth road beyond, with the
stubble of grain-fields on each side and the mountains off to the right.
It looked like Spain, but it was Wyoming.

“I hope they have a lot of good luck.”

“They won’t,” I said, “and Schmidt won’t be President either.”

The cement road stopped. The road was gravelled now and we left the
plain and started up between two foot-hills; the road in a curve and
commencing to climb. The soil of the hills was red, the sage grew in
gray clumps, and as the road rose we could see across the hills and away
across the plain of the valley to the mountains. They were farther away
now and they looked more like Spain than ever. The road curved and
climbed again, and ahead there were some grouse dusting in the road.
They flew as we came toward them, their wings beating fast, then sailing
in long slants, and lit on the hillside below.

“They are so big and lovely. They’re bigger than European partridges.”

“It’s a fine country for la chasse, Fontan says.”

“And when the chasse is gone?”

“They’ll be dead then.”

“The boy won’t.”

“There’s nothing to prove he won’t be,” I said.

“We ought to have gone last night.”

“Oh, yes,” I said. “We ought to have gone.”




                  THE GAMBLER, THE NUN, AND THE RADIO


They brought them in around midnight and then, all night long, every one
along the corridor heard the Russian.

“Where is he shot?” Mr. Frazer asked the night nurse.

“In the thigh, I think.”

“What about the other one?”

“Oh, he’s going to die, I’m afraid.”

“Where is he shot?”

“Twice in the abdomen. They only found one of the bullets.”

They were both beet workers, a Mexican and a Russian, and they were
sitting drinking coffee in an all-night restaurant when some one came in
the door and started shooting at the Mexican. The Russian crawled under
a table and was hit, finally, by a stray shot fired at the Mexican as he
lay on the floor with two bullets in his abdomen. That was what the
paper said.

The Mexican told the police he had no idea who shot him. He believed it
to be an accident.

“An accident that he fired eight shots at you and hit you twice, there?”

“Si, señor,” said the Mexican, who was named Cayetano Ruiz.

“An accident that he hit me at all, the cabron,” he said to the
interpreter.

“What does he say?” asked the detective sergeant, looking across the bed
at the interpreter.

“He says it was an accident.”

“Tell him to tell the truth, that he is going to die,” the detective
said.

“Na,” said Cayetano. “But tell him that I feel very sick and would
prefer not to talk so much.”

“He says that he is telling the truth,” the interpreter said. Then,
speaking confidently, to the detective, “He don’t know who shot him.
They shot him in the back.”

“Yes,” said the detective. “I understand that, but why did the bullets
all go in the front?”

“Maybe he is spinning around,” said the interpreter.

“Listen,” said the detective, shaking his finger almost at Cayetano’s
nose, which projected, waxen yellow, from his dead-man’s face in which
his eyes were alive as a hawk’s. “I don’t give a damn who shot you, but
I’ve got to clear this thing up. Don’t you want the man who shot you to
be punished? Tell him that,” he said to the interpreter.

“He says to tell who shot you.”

“Mandarlo al carajo,” said Cayetano, who was very tired.

“He says he never saw the fellow at all,” the interpreter said. “I tell
you straight they shot him in the back.”

“Ask him who shot the Russian.”

“Poor Russian,” said Cayetano. “He was on the floor with his head
enveloped in his arms. He started to give cries when they shoot him and
he is giving cries ever since. Poor Russian.”

“He says some fellow that he doesn’t know. Maybe the same fellow that
shot him.”

“Listen,” the detective said. “This isn’t Chicago. You’re not a
gangster. You don’t have to act like a moving picture. It’s all right to
tell who shot you. Anybody would tell who shot them. That’s all right to
do. Suppose you don’t tell who he is and he shoots somebody else.
Suppose he shoots a woman or a child. You can’t let him get away with
that. You tell him,” he said to Mr. Frazer. “I don’t trust that damn
interpreter.”

“I am very reliable,” the interpreter said. Cayetano looked at Mr.
Frazer.

“Listen, amigo,” said Mr. Frazer. “The policeman says that we are not in
Chicago but in Hailey, Montana. You are not a bandit and this has
nothing to do with the cinema.”

“I believe him,” said Cayetano softly. “Ya lo creo.”

“One can, with honor, denounce one’s assailant. Every one does it here,
he says. He says what happens if after shooting you, this man shoots a
woman or a child?”

“I am not married,” Cayetano said.

“He says any woman, any child.”

“The man is not crazy,” Cayetano said.

“He says you should denounce him,” Mr. Frazer finished.

“Thank you,” Cayetano said. “You are of the great translators. I speak
English, but badly. I understand it all right. How did you break your
leg?”

“A fall off a horse.”

“What bad luck. I am very sorry. Does it hurt much?”

“Not now. At first, yes.”

“Listen, amigo,” Cayetano began, “I am very weak. You will pardon me.
Also I have much pain; enough pain. It is very possible that I die.
Please get this policeman out of here because I am very tired.” He made
as though to roll to one side; then held himself still.

“I told him everything exactly as you said and he said to tell you,
truly, that he doesn’t know who shot him and that he is very weak and
wishes you would question him later on,” Mr. Frazer said.

“He’ll probably be dead later on.”

“That’s quite possible.”

“That’s why I want to question him now.”

“Somebody shot him in the back, I tell you,” the interpreter said.

“Oh, for Chrisake,” the detective sergeant said, and put his notebook in
his pocket.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Outside in the corridor the detective sergeant stood with the
interpreter beside Mr. Frazer’s wheeled chair.

“I suppose you think somebody shot him in the back too?”

“Yes,” Frazer said. “Somebody shot him in the back. What’s it to you?”

“Don’t get sore,” the sergeant said. “I wish I could talk spik.”

“Why don’t you learn?”

“You don’t have to get sore. I don’t get any fun out of asking that spik
questions. If I could talk spik it would be different.”

“You don’t need to talk Spanish,” the interpreter said. “I am a very
reliable interpreter.”

“Oh, for Chrisake,” the sergeant said. “Well, so long. I’ll come up and
see you.”

“Thanks. I’m always in.”

“I guess you are all right. That was bad luck all right. Plenty bad
luck.”

“It’s coming along good now since he spliced the bone.”

“Yes, but it’s a long time. A long, long time.”

“Don’t let anybody shoot you in the back.”

“That’s right,” he said. “That’s right. Well, I’m glad you’re not sore.”

“So long,” said Mr. Frazer.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Mr. Frazer did not see Cayetano again for a long time, but each morning
Sister Cecilia brought news of him. He was so uncomplaining she said and
he was very bad now. He had peritonitis and they thought he could not
live. Poor Cayetano, she said. He had such beautiful hands and such a
fine face and he never complains. The odor, now, was really terrific. He
would point toward his nose with one finger and smile and shake his
head, she said. He felt badly about the odor. It embarrassed him, Sister
Cecilia said. Oh, he was such a fine patient. He always smiled. He
wouldn’t go to confession to Father but he promised to say his prayers,
and not a Mexican had been to see him since he had been brought in. The
Russian was going out at the end of the week. I could never feel
anything about the Russian, Sister Cecilia said. Poor fellow, he
suffered too. It was a greased bullet and dirty and the wound infected,
but he made so much noise and then I always like the bad ones. That
Cayetano, he’s a bad one. Oh, he must really be a bad one, a thoroughly
bad one, he’s so fine and delicately made and he’s never done any work
with his hands. He’s not a beet worker. I know he’s not a beet worker.
His hands are as smooth and not a callous on them. I know he’s a bad one
of some sort. I’m going down and pray for him now. Poor Cayetano, he’s
having a dreadful time and he doesn’t make a sound. What did they have
to shoot him for? Oh, that poor Cayetano! I’m going right down and pray
for him.

She went right down and prayed for him.

                 *        *        *        *        *

In that hospital a radio did not work very well until it was dusk. They
said it was because there was so much ore in the ground or something
about the mountains, but anyway it did not work well at all until it
began to get dark outside; but all night it worked beautifully and when
one station stopped you could go farther west and pick up another. The
last one that you could get was Seattle, Washington, and due to the
difference in time, when they signed off at four o’clock in the morning
it was five o’clock in the morning in the hospital; and at six o’clock
you could get the morning revellers in Minneapolis. That was on account
of the difference in time, too, and Mr. Frazer used to like to think of
the morning revellers arriving at the studio and picture how they would
look getting off a street car before daylight in the morning carrying
their instruments. Maybe that was wrong and they kept their instruments
at the place they revelled, but he always pictured them with their
instruments. He had never been in Minneapolis and believed he probably
would never go there, but he knew what it looked like that early in the
morning.

Out of the window of the hospital you could see a field with tumbleweed
coming out of the snow, and a bare clay butte. One morning the doctor
wanted to show Mr. Frazer two pheasants that were out there in the snow,
and pulling the bed toward the window, the reading light fell off the
iron bedstead and hit Mr. Frazer on the head. This does not sound so
funny now but it was very funny then. Every one was looking out the
window, and the doctor, who was a most excellent doctor, was pointing at
the pheasants and pulling the bed toward the window, and then, just as
in a comic section, Mr. Frazer was knocked out by the leaded base of the
lamp hitting the top of his head. It seemed the antithesis of healing or
whatever people were in the hospital for, and every one thought it was
very funny, as a joke on Mr. Frazer and on the doctor. Everything is
much simpler in a hospital, including the jokes.

From the other window, if the bed was turned, you could see the town,
with a little smoke above it, and the Dawson mountains looking like real
mountains with the winter snow on them. Those were the two views since
the wheeled chair had proved to be premature. It is really best to be in
bed if you are in a hospital; since two views, with time to observe
them, from a room the temperature of which you control, are much better
than any number of views seen for a few minutes from hot, empty rooms
that are waiting for some one else, or just abandoned, which you are
wheeled in and out of. If you stay long enough in a room the view,
whatever it is, acquires a great value and becomes very important and
you would not change it, not even by a different angle. Just as, with
the radio, there are certain things that you become fond of, and you
welcome them and resent the new things. The best tunes they had that
winter were “Sing Something Simple,” “Singsong Girl,” and “Little White
Lies.” No other tunes were as satisfactory, Mr. Frazer felt. “Betty
Co-ed” was a good tune too, but the parody of the words which came
unavoidably into Mr. Frazer’s mind, grew so steadily and increasingly
obscene that there being no one to appreciate it, he finally abandoned
it and let the song go back to football.

About nine o’clock in the morning they would start using the X-ray
machine, and then the radio, which, by then, was only getting Hailey,
became useless. Many people in Hailey who owned radios protested about
the hospital’s X-ray machine which ruined their morning reception, but
there was never any action taken, although many felt it was a shame the
hospital could not use their machine at a time when people were not
using their radios.

                 *        *        *        *        *

About the time when it became necessary to turn off the radio Sister
Cecilia came in.

“How’s Cayetano, Sister Cecilia?” Mr. Frazer asked.

“Oh, he’s very bad.”

“Is he out of his head?”

“No, but I’m afraid he’s going to die.”

“How are you?”

“I’m very worried about him, and do you know that absolutely no one has
come to see him? He could die just like a dog for all those Mexicans
care. They’re really dreadful.”

“Do you want to come up and hear the game this afternoon?”

“Oh, no,” she said. “I’d be too excited. I’ll be in the chapel praying.”

“We ought to be able to hear it pretty well,” Mr. Frazer said. “They’re
playing out on the coast and the difference in time will bring it late
enough so we can get it all right.”

“Oh, no. I couldn’t do it. The world series nearly finished me. When the
Athletics were at bat I was praying right out loud: ‘Oh, Lord, direct
their batting eyes! Oh, Lord, may he hit one! Oh, Lord, may he hit
safely!’ Then when they filled the bases in the third game, you
remember, it was too much for me. ‘Oh, Lord, may he hit it out of the
lot! Oh, Lord, may he drive it clean over the fence!’ Then you know when
the Cardinals would come to bat it was simply dreadful. ‘Oh, Lord, may
they not see it! Oh, Lord, don’t let them even catch a glimpse of it!
Oh, Lord, may they fan!’ And this game is even worse. It’s Notre Dame.
Our Lady. No, I’ll be in the chapel. For Our Lady. They’re playing for
Our Lady. I wish you’d write something sometime for Our Lady. You could
do it. You know you could do it, Mr. Frazer.”

“I don’t know anything about her that I could write. It’s mostly been
written already,” Mr. Frazer said. “You wouldn’t like the way I write.
She wouldn’t care for it either.”

“You’ll write about her sometime,” Sister said. “I know you will. You
must write about Our Lady.”

“You’d better come up and hear the game.”

“It would be too much for me. No, I’ll be in the chapel doing what I
can.”

That afternoon they had been playing about five minutes when a
probationer came into the room and said, “Sister Cecilia wants to know
how the game is going?”

“Tell her they have a touchdown already.”

In a little while the probationer came into the room again.

“Tell her they’re playing them off their feet,” Mr. Frazer said.

A little later he rang the bell for the nurse who was on floor duty.
“Would you mind going down to the chapel or sending word down to Sister
Cecilia that Notre Dame has them fourteen to nothing at the end of the
first quarter and that it’s all right. She can stop praying.”

In a few minutes Sister Cecilia came into the room. She was very
excited. “What does fourteen to nothing mean? I don’t know anything
about this game. That’s a nice safe lead in baseball. But I don’t know
anything about football. It may not mean a thing. I’m going right back
down to the chapel and pray until it’s finished.”

“They have them beaten,” Frazer said. “I promise you. Stay and listen
with me.”

“No. No. No. No. No. No. No,” she said. “I’m going right down to the
chapel to pray.”

Mr. Frazer sent down word whenever Notre Dame scored, and finally, when
it had been dark a long time, the final result.

“How’s Sister Cecilia?”

“They’re all at chapel,” she said.

The next morning Sister Cecilia came in. She was very pleased and
confident.

“I knew they couldn’t beat Our Lady,” she said. “They couldn’t.
Cayetano’s better too. He’s much better. He’s going to have visitors. He
can’t see them yet, but they are going to come and that will make him
feel better and know he’s not forgotten by his own people. I went down
and saw that O’Brien boy at Police Headquarters and told him that he’s
got to send some Mexicans up to see poor Cayetano. He’s going to send
some this afternoon. Then that poor man will feel better. It’s wicked
the way no one has come to see him.”

That afternoon about five o’clock three Mexicans came into the room.

“Can one?” asked the biggest one, who had very thick lips and was quite
fat.

“Why not?” Mr. Frazer answered. “Sit down, gentlemen. Will you take
something?”

“Many thanks,” said the big one.

“Thanks,” said the darkest and smallest one.

“Thanks, no,” said the thin one. “It mounts to my head.” He tapped his
head.

The nurse brought some glasses. “Please give them the bottle,” Frazer
said. “It is from Red Lodge,” he explained.

“That of Red Lodge is the best,” said the big one. “Much better than
that of Big Timber.”

“Clearly,” said the smallest one, “and costs more too.”

“In Red Lodge it is of all prices,” said the big one.

“How many tubes has the radio?” asked the one who did not drink.

“Seven.”

“Very beautiful,” he said. “What does it cost?”

“I don’t know,” Mr. Frazer said. “It is rented.”

“You gentlemen are friends of Cayetano?”

“No,” said the big one. “We are friends of he who wounded him.”

“We were sent here by the police,” the smallest one said.

“We have a little place,” the big one said. “He and I,” indicating the
one who did not drink. “He has a little place too,” indicating the
small, dark one. “The police tell us we have to come—so we come.”

“I am very happy you have come.”

“Equally,” said the big one.

“Will you have another little cup?”

“Why not?” said the big one.

“With your permission,” said the smallest one.

“Not me,” said the thin one. “It mounts to my head.”

“It is very good,” said the smallest one.

“Why not try some,” Mr. Frazer asked the thin one. “Let a little mount
to your head.”

“Afterwards comes the headache,” said the thin one.

“Could you not send friends of Cayetano to see him?” Frazer asked.

“He has no friends.”

“Every man has friends.”

“This one, no.”

“What does he do?”

“He is a card-player.”

“Is he good?”

“I believe it.”

“From me,” said the smallest one, “he won one hundred and eighty
dollars. Now there is no longer one hundred and eighty dollars in the
world.”

“From me,” said the thin one, “he won two hundred and eleven dollars.
Fix yourself on that figure.”

“I never played with him,” said the fat one.

“He must be very rich,” Mr. Frazer suggested.

“He is poorer than we,” said the little Mexican.

“He has no more than the shirt on his back.”

“And that shirt is of little value now,” Mr. Frazer said. “Perforated as
it is.”

“Clearly.”

“The one who wounded him was a card-player?”

“No, a beet worker. He has had to leave town.”

“Fix yourself on this,” said the smallest one. “He was the best guitar
player ever in this town. The finest.”

“What a shame.”

“I believe it,” said the biggest one. “How he could touch the guitar.”

“There are no good guitar players left?”

“Not the shadow of a guitar player.”

“There is an accordion player who is worth something,” the thin man
said.

“There are a few who touch various instruments,” the big one said. “You
like music?”

“How would I not?”

“We will come one night with music? You think the sister would allow it?
She seems very amiable.”

“I am sure she would permit it when Cayetano is able to hear it.”

“Is she a little crazy?” asked the thin one.

“Who?”

“That sister?”

“No,” Mr. Frazer said. “She is a fine woman of great intelligence and
sympathy.”

“I distrust all priests, monks, and sisters,” said the thin one.

“He had bad experiences when a boy,” the smallest one said.

“I was acolyte,” the thin one said proudly. “Now I believe in nothing.
Neither do I go to mass.”

“Why? Does it mount to your head?”

“No,” said the thin one. “It is alcohol that mounts to my head. Religion
is the opium of the poor.”

“I thought mariajuana was the opium of the poor,” Frazer said.

“Did you ever smoke opium?” the big one asked.

“No.”

“Nor I,” he said. “It seems it is very bad. One commences and cannot
stop. It is a vice.”

“Like religion,” said the thin one.

“This one,” said the smallest Mexican, “is very strong against
religion.”

“It is necessary to be very strong against something,” Mr. Frazer said
politely.

“I respect those who have faith even though they are ignorant,” the thin
one said.

“Good,” said Mr. Frazer.

“What can we bring you?” asked the big Mexican. “Do you lack for
anything?”

“I would be glad to buy some beer if there is good beer.”

“We will bring beer.”

“Another copita before you go?”

“It is very good.”

“We are robbing you.”

“I can’t take it. It goes to my head. Then I have a bad headache and
sick at the stomach.”

“Good-by, gentlemen.”

“Good-by and thanks.”

They went out and there was supper and then the radio, turned to be as
quiet as possible and still be heard, and the stations finally signing
off in this order: Denver, Salt Lake City, Los Angeles, and Seattle. Mr.
Frazer received no picture of Denver from the radio. He could see Denver
from the _Denver Post_, and correct the picture from _The Rocky Mountain
News_. Nor did he ever have any feel of Salt Lake City or Los Angeles
from what he heard from those places. All he felt about Salt Lake City
was that it was clean, but dull, and there were too many ballrooms
mentioned in too many big hotels for him to see Los Angeles. He could
not feel it for the ballrooms. But Seattle he came to know very well,
the taxicab company with the big white cabs (each cab equipped with
radio itself) he rode in every night out to the roadhouse on the
Canadian side where he followed the course of parties by the musical
selections they phoned for. He lived in Seattle from two o’clock on,
each night, hearing the pieces that all the different people asked for,
and it was as real as Minneapolis, where the revellers left their beds
each morning to make that trip down to the studio. Mr. Frazer grew very
fond of Seattle, Washington.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The Mexicans came and brought beer but it was not good beer. Mr. Frazer
saw them but he did not feel like talking, and when they went he knew
they would not come again. His nerves had become tricky and he disliked
seeing people while he was in this condition. His nerves went bad at the
end of five weeks, and while he was pleased they lasted that long yet he
resented being forced to make the same experiment when he already knew
the answer. Mr. Frazer had been through this all before. The only thing
which was new to him was the radio. He played it all night long, turned
so low he could barely hear it, and he was learning to listen to it
without thinking.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Sister Cecilia came into the room about ten o’clock in the morning on
that day and brought the mail. She was very handsome, and Mr. Frazer
liked to see her and to hear her talk, but the mail, supposedly coming
from a different world, was more important. However, there was nothing
in the mail of any interest.

“You look _so_ much better,” she said. “You’ll be leaving us soon.”

“Yes,” Mr. Frazer said. “You look very happy this morning.”

“Oh, I am. This morning I feel as though I might be a saint.”

Mr. Frazer was a little taken aback at this.

“Yes,” Sister Cecila went on. “That’s what I want to be. A saint. Ever
since I was a little girl I’ve wanted to be a saint. When I was a girl I
thought if I renounced the world and went into the convent I would be a
saint. That was what I wanted to be and that was what I thought I had to
do to be one. I expected I would be a saint. I was absolutely sure I
would be one. For just a moment I thought I was one. I was so happy and
it seemed so simple and easy. When I awoke in the morning I expected I
would be a saint, but I wasn’t. I’ve never become one. I want so to be
one. All I want is to be a saint. That is all I’ve ever wanted. And this
morning I feel as though I might be one. Oh, I hope I will get to be
one.”

“You’ll be one. Everybody gets what they want. That’s what they always
tell me.”

“I don’t know now. When I was a girl it seemed so simple. I knew I would
be a saint. Only I believed it took time when I found it did not happen
suddenly. Now it seems almost impossible.”

“I’d say you had a good chance.”

“Do you really think so? No, I don’t want just to be encouraged. Don’t
just encourage me. I want to be a saint. I want so to be a saint.”

“Of course you’ll be a saint,” Mr. Frazer said.

“No, probably I won’t be. But, oh, if I could only be a saint! I’d be
perfectly happy.”

“You’re three to one to be a saint.”

“No, don’t encourage me. But, oh, if I could only be a saint! If I could
only be a saint!”

“How’s your friend Cayetano?”

“He’s going to get well but he’s paralyzed. One of the bullets hit the
big nerve that goes down through his thigh and that leg is paralyzed.
They only found it out when he got well enough so that he could move.”

“Maybe the nerve will regenerate.”

“I’m praying that it will,” Sister Cecilia said. “You ought to see him.”

“I don’t feel like seeing anybody.”

“You know you’d like to see him. They could wheel him in here.”

“All right.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

They wheeled him in, thin, his skin transparent, his hair black and
needing to be cut, his eyes very laughing, his teeth bad when he smiled.

“Hola, amigo! Que tal?”

“As you see,” said Mr. Frazer. “And thou?”

“Alive and with the leg paralyzed.”

“Bad,” Mr. Frazer said. “But the nerve can regenerate and be as good as
new.”

“So they tell me.”

“What about the pain?”

“Not now. For a while I was crazy with it in the belly. I thought the
pain alone would kill me.”

Sister Cecilia was observing them happily.

“She tells me you never made a sound,” Mr. Frazer said.

“So many people in the ward,” the Mexican said deprecatingly. “What
class of pain do you have?”

“Big enough. Clearly not as bad as yours. When the nurse goes out I cry
an hour, two hours. It rests me. My nerves are bad now.”

“You have the radio. If I had a private room and a radio I would be
crying and yelling all night long.”

“I doubt it.”

“Hombre, si. It’s very healthy. But you cannot do it with so many
people.”

“At least,” Mr. Frazer said, “the hands are still good. They tell me you
make your living with the hands.”

“And the head,” he said, tapping his forehead. “But the head isn’t worth
as much.”

“Three of your countrymen were here.”

“Sent by the police to see me.”

“They brought some beer.”

“It probably was bad.”

“It was bad.”

“Tonight, sent by the police, they come to serenade me.” He laughed,
then tapped his stomach. “I cannot laugh yet. As musicians they are
fatal.”

“And the one who shot you?”

“Another fool. I won thirty-eight dollars from him at cards. That is not
to kill about.”

“The three told me you win much money.”

“And am poorer than the birds.”

“How?”

“I am a poor idealist. I am the victim of illusions.” He laughed, then
grinned and tapped his stomach. “I am a professional gambler but I like
to gamble. To really gamble. Little gambling is all crooked. For real
gambling you need luck. I have no luck.”

“Never?”

“Never. I am completely without luck. Look, this cabron who shoots me
just now. Can he shoot? No. The first shot he fires into nothing. The
second is intercepted by a poor Russian. That would seem to be luck.
What happens? He shoots me twice in the belly. He is a lucky man. I have
no luck. He could not hit a horse if he were holding the stirrup. All
luck.”

“I thought he shot you first and the Russian after.”

“No, the Russian first, me after. The paper was mistaken.”

“Why didn’t you shoot him?”

“I never carry a gun. With my luck, if I carried a gun I would be hanged
ten times a year. I am a cheap card player, only that.” He stopped, then
continued. “When I make a sum of money I gamble and when I gamble I
lose. I have passed at dice for three thousand dollars and crapped out
for the six. With good dice. More than once.”

“Why continue?”

“If I live long enough the luck will change. I have bad luck now for
fifteen years. If I ever get any good luck I will be rich.” He grinned.
“I am a good gambler, really I would enjoy being rich.”

“Do you have bad luck with all games?”

“With everything and with women.” He smiled again, showing his bad
teeth.

“Truly?”

“Truly.”

“And what is there to do?”

“Continue, slowly, and wait for luck to change.”

“But with women?”

“No gambler has luck with women. He is too concentrated. He works
nights. When he should be with the woman. No man who works nights can
hold a woman if the woman is worth anything.”

“You are a philosopher.”

“No, hombre. A gambler of the small towns. One small town, then another,
another, then a big town, then start over again.”

“Then shot in the belly.”

“The first time,” he said. “That has only happened once.”

“I tire you talking?” Mr. Frazer suggested.

“No,” he said. “I must tire you.”

“And the leg?”

“I have no great use for the leg. I am all right with the leg or not. I
will be able to circulate.”

“I wish you luck, truly, and with all my heart,” Mr. Frazer said.

“Equally,” he said. “And that the pain stops.”

“It will not last, certainly. It is passing. It is of no importance.”

“That it passes quickly.”

“Equally.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

That night the Mexicans played the accordion and other instruments in
the ward and it was cheerful and the noise of the inhalations and
exhalations of the accordion, and of the bells, the traps, and the drum
came down the corridor. In that ward there was a rodeo rider who had
come out of the chutes on Midnight on a hot dusty afternoon with a big
crowd watching, and now, with a broken back, was going to learn to work
in leather and to cane chairs when he got well enough to leave the
hospital. There was a carpenter who had fallen with a scaffolding and
broken both ankles and both wrists. He had lit like a cat but without a
cat’s resiliency. They could fix him up so that he could work again but
it would take a long time. There was a boy from a farm, about sixteen
years old, with a broken leg that had been badly set and was to be
rebroken. There was Cayetano Ruiz, a small-town gambler with a paralyzed
leg. Down the corridor Mr. Frazer could hear them all laughing and merry
with the music made by the Mexicans who had been sent by the police. The
Mexicans were having a good time. They came in, very excited, to see Mr.
Frazer and wanted to know if there was anything he wanted them to play,
and they came twice more to play at night of their own accord.

The last time they played Mr. Frazer lay in his room with the door open
and listened to the noisy, bad music and could not keep from thinking.
When they wanted to know what he wished played, he asked for the
Cucaracha, which has the sinister lightness and deftness of so many of
the tunes men have gone to die to. They played noisily and with emotion.
The tune was better than most of such tunes, to Mr. Frazer’s mind, but
the effect was all the same.

In spite of this introduction of emotion, Mr. Frazer went on thinking.
Usually he avoided thinking all he could, except when he was writing,
but now he was thinking about those who were playing and what the little
one had said.

Religion is the opium of the people. He believed that, that dyspeptic
little joint-keeper. Yes, and music is the opium of the people. Old
mount-to-the-head hadn’t thought of that. And now economics is the opium
of the people; along with patriotism the opium of the people in Italy
and Germany. What about sexual intercourse; was that an opium of the
people? Of some of the people. Of some of the best of the people. But
drink was a sovereign opium of the people, oh, an excellent opium.
Although some prefer the radio, another opium of the people, a cheap one
he had just been using. Along with these went gambling, an opium of the
people if there ever was one, one of the oldest. Ambition was another,
an opium of the people, along with a belief in any new form of
government. What you wanted was the minimum of government, always less
government. Liberty, what we believed in, now the name of a MacFadden
publication. We believed in that although they had not found a new name
for it yet. But what was the real one? What was the real, the actual,
opium of the people? He knew it very well. It was gone just a little way
around the corner in that well-lighted part of his mind that was there
after two or more drinks in the evening; that he knew was there (it was
not really there of course). What was it? He knew very well. What was
it? Of course; bread was the opium of the people. Would he remember that
and would it make sense in the daylight? Bread is the opium of the
people.

“Listen,” Mr. Frazer said to the nurse when she came. “Get that little
thin Mexican in here, will you, please?”

“How did you like it?” the Mexican said at the door.

“Very much.”

“It is a historic tune,” the Mexican said. “It is the tune of the real
revolution.”

“Listen,” said Mr. Frazer. “Why should the people be operated on without
an anæsthetic?”

“I do not understand.”

“Why are not all the opiums of the people, good? What do you want to do
with the people?”

“They should be rescued from ignorance.”

“Don’t talk nonsense. Education is an opium of the people. You ought to
know that. You’ve had a little.”

“You do not believe in education?”

“No,” said Mr. Frazer. “In knowledge, yes.”

“I do not follow you.”

“Many times I do not follow myself with pleasure.”

“You want to hear the Cucaracha another time?” asked the Mexican
worriedly.

“Yes,” said Mr. Frazer. “Play the Cucaracha another time. It’s better
than the radio.”

Revolution, Mr. Frazer thought, is no opium. Revolution is a catharsis;
an ecstasy which can only be prolonged by tyranny. The opiums are for
before and for after. He was thinking well, a little too well.

They would go now in a little while, he thought, and they would take the
Cucaracha with them. Then he would have a little spot of the giant
killer and play the radio, you could play the radio so that you could
hardly hear it.




                            FATHERS AND SONS


There had been a sign to detour in the centre of the main street of this
town, but cars had obviously gone through, so, believing it was some
repair which had been completed, Nicholas Adams drove on through the
town along the empty, brick-paved street, stopped by traffic lights that
flashed on and off on this traffic-less Sunday, and would be gone next
year when the payments on the system were not met; on under the heavy
trees of the small town that are a part of your heart if it is your town
and you have walked under them, but that are only too heavy, that shut
out the sun and that dampen the houses for a stranger; out past the last
house and onto the highway that rose and fell straight away ahead with
banks of red dirt sliced cleanly away and the second-growth timber on
both sides. It was not his country but it was the middle of fall and all
of this country was good to drive through and to see. The cotton was
picked and in the clearings there were patches of corn, some cut with
streaks of red sorghum, and, driving easily, his son asleep on the seat
by his side, the day’s run made, knowing the town he would reach for the
night, Nick noticed which corn fields had soy beans or peas in them, how
the thickets and the cut-over land lay, where the cabins and houses were
in relation to the fields and the thickets; hunting the country in his
mind as he went by; sizing up each clearing as to feed and cover and
figuring where you would find a covey and which way they would fly.

In shooting quail you must not get between them and their habitual
cover, once the dogs have found them, or when they flush they will come
pouring at you, some rising steep, some skimming by your ears, whirring
into a size you have never seen them in the air as they pass, the only
way being to turn and take them over your shoulder as they go, before
they set their wings and angle down into the thicket. Hunting this
country for quail as his father had taught him, Nicholas Adams started
thinking about his father. When he first thought about him it was always
the eyes. The big frame, the quick movements, the wide shoulders, the
hooked, hawk nose, the beard that covered the weak chin, you never
thought about—it was always the eyes. They were protected in his head
by the formation of the brows; set deep as though a special protection
had been devised for some very valuable instrument. They saw much
farther and much quicker than the human eye sees and they were the great
gift his father had. His father saw as a big-horn ram or as an eagle
sees, literally.

He would be standing with his father on one shore of the lake, his own
eyes were very good then, and his father would say, “They’ve run up the
flag.” Nick could not see the flag or the flag pole. “There,” his father
would say, “it’s your sister Dorothy. She’s got the flag up and she’s
walking out onto the dock.”

Nick would look across the lake and he could see the long wooded
shore-line, the higher timber behind, the point that guarded the bay,
the clear hills of the farm and the white of their cottage in the trees
but he could not see any flag pole, or any dock, only the white of the
beach and the curve of the shore.

“Can you see the sheep on the hillside toward the point?”

“Yes.”

They were a whitish patch on the gray-green of the hill.

“I can count them,” his father said.

Like all men with a faculty that surpasses human requirements, his
father was very nervous. Then, too, he was sentimental, and, like most
sentimental people, he was both cruel and abused. Also, he had much bad
luck, and it was not all of it his own. He had died in a trap that he
had helped only a little to set, and they had all betrayed him in their
various ways before he died. All sentimental people are betrayed so many
times. Nick could not write about him yet, although he would, later, but
the quail country made him remember him as he was when Nick was a boy
and he was very grateful to him for two things; fishing and shooting.
His father was as sound on those two things as he was unsound on sex,
for instance, and Nick was glad that it had been that way; for some one
has to give you your first gun or the opportunity to get it and use it,
and you have to live where there is game or fish if you are to learn
about them, and now, at thirty-eight, he loved to fish and to shoot
exactly as much as when he first had gone with his father. It was a
passion that had never slackened and he was very grateful to his father
for bringing him to know it.

While for the other, that his father was not sound about, all the
equipment you will ever have is provided and each man learns all there
is for him to know about it without advice; and it makes no difference
where you live. He remembered very clearly the only two pieces of
information his father had given him about that. Once when they were out
shooting together Nick shot a red squirrel out of a hemlock tree. The
squirrel fell, wounded, and when Nick picked him up bit the boy clean
through the ball of the thumb.

“The dirty little bugger,” Nick said and smacked the squirrel’s head
against the tree. “Look how he bit me.”

His father looked and said, “Suck it out clean and put some iodine on
when you get home.”

“The little bugger,” Nick said.

“Do you know what a bugger is?” his father asked him.

“We call anything a bugger,” Nick said.

“A bugger is a man who has intercourse with animals.”

“Why?” Nick said.

“I don’t know,” his father said. “But it is a heinous crime.”

Nick’s imagination was both stirred and horrified by this and he thought
of various animals but none seemed attractive or practical and that was
the sum total of direct sexual knowledge bequeathed him by his father
except on one other subject. One morning he read in the paper that
Enrico Caruso had been arrested for mashing.

“What is mashing?”

“It is one of the most heinous of crimes,” his father answered. Nick’s
imagination pictured the great tenor doing something strange, bizarre,
and heinous with a potato masher to a beautiful lady who looked like the
pictures of Anna Held on the inside of cigar boxes. He resolved, with
considerable horror, that when he was old enough he would try mashing at
least once.

His father had summed up the whole matter by stating that masturbation
produced blindness, insanity, and death, while a man who went with
prostitutes would contract hideous venereal diseases and that the thing
to do was to keep your hands off of people. On the other hand his father
had the finest pair of eyes he had ever seen and Nick had loved him very
much and for a long time. Now, knowing how it had all been, even
remembering the earliest times before things had gone badly was not good
remembering. If he wrote it he could get rid of it. He had gotten rid of
many things by writing them. But it was still too early for that. There
were still too many people. So he decided to think of something else.
There was nothing to do about his father and he had thought it all
through many times. The handsome job the undertaker had done on his
father’s face had not blurred in his mind and all the rest of it was
quite clear, including the responsibilities. He had complimented the
undertaker. The undertaker had been both proud and smugly pleased. But
it was not the undertaker that had given him that last face. The
undertaker had only made certain dashingly executed repairs of doubtful
artistic merit. The face had been making itself and being made for a
long time. It had modelled fast in the last three years. It was a good
story but there were still too many people alive for him to write it.

Nick’s own education in those earlier matters had been acquired in the
hemlock woods behind the Indian camp. This was reached by a trail which
ran from the cottage through the woods to the farm and then by a road
which wound through the slashings to the camp. Now he could still feel
all of that trail with bare feet. First there was the pine needle loam
through the hemlock woods behind the cottage where the fallen logs
crumbled into wood dust and long splintered pieces of wood hung like
javelins in the tree that had been struck by lightning. You crossed the
creek on a log and if you stepped off there was the black muck of the
swamp. You climbed a fence out of the woods and the trail was hard in
the sun across the field with cropped grass and sheep sorrel and mullen
growing and to the left the quaky bog of the creek bottom where the
killdeer plover fed. The spring house was in that creek. Below the barn
there was fresh warm manure and the other older manure that was caked
dry on top. Then there was another fence and the hard, hot trail from
the barn to the house and the hot sandy road that ran down to the woods,
crossing the creek, on a bridge this time, where the cat-tails grew that
you soaked in kerosene to make jack-lights with for spearing fish at
night.

Then the main road went off to the left, skirting the woods and climbing
the hill, while you went into the woods on the wide clay and shale road,
cool under the trees, and broadened for them to skid out the hemlock
bark the Indians cut. The hemlock bark was piled in long rows of stacks,
roofed over with more bark, like houses, and the peeled logs lay huge
and yellow where the trees had been felled. They left the logs in the
woods to rot, they did not even clear away or burn the tops. It was only
the bark they wanted for the tannery at Boyne City; hauling it across
the lake on the ice in winter, and each year there was less forest and
more open, hot, shadeless, weed-grown slashing.

But there was still much forest then, virgin forest where the trees grew
high before there were any branches and you walked on the brown, clean,
springy-needled ground with no undergrowth and it was cool on the
hottest days and they three lay against the trunk of a hemlock wider
than two beds are long, with the breeze high in the tops and the cool
light that came in patches, and Billy said:

“You want Trudy again?”

“You want to?”

“Un Huh.”

“Come on.”

“No, here.”

“But Billy——”

“I no mind Billy. He my brother.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

Then afterwards they sat, the three of them, listening for a black
squirrel that was in the top branches where they could not see him. They
were waiting for him to bark again because when he barked he would jerk
his tail and Nick would shoot where he saw any movement. His father gave
him only three cartridges a day to hunt with and he had a single-barrel
twenty-gauge shotgun with a very long barrel.

“Son of a bitch never move,” Billy said.

“You shoot, Nickie. Scare him. We see him jump. Shoot him again,” Trudy
said. It was a long speech for her.

“I’ve only got two shells,” Nick said.

“Son of a bitch,” said Billy.

They sat against the tree and were quiet. Nick was feeling hollow and
happy.

“Eddie says he going to come some night sleep in bed with you sister
Dorothy.”

“What?”

“He said.”

Trudy nodded.

“That’s all he want do,” she said. Eddie was their older half-brother.
He was seventeen.

“If Eddie Gilby ever comes at night and even speaks to Dorothy you know
what I’d do to him? I’d kill him like this.” Nick cocked the gun and
hardly taking aim pulled the trigger, blowing a hole as big as your hand
in the head or belly of that half-breed bastard Eddie Gilby. “Like that.
I’d kill him like that.”

“He better not come then,” Trudy said. She put her hand in Nick’s
pocket.

“He better watch out plenty,” said Billy.

“He’s big bluff,” Trudy was exploring with her hand in Nick’s pocket.
“But don’t you kill him. You get plenty trouble.”

“I’d kill him like that,” Nick said. Eddie Gilby lay on the ground with
all his chest shot away. Nick put his foot on him proudly.

“I’d scalp him,” he said happily.

“No,” said Trudy. “That’s dirty.”

“I’d scalp him and send it to his mother.”

“His mother dead,” Trudy said. “Don’t you kill him, Nickie. Don’t you
kill him for me.”

“After I scalped him I’d throw him to the dogs.”

Billy was very depressed. “He better watch out,” he said gloomily.

“They’d tear him to pieces,” Nick said, pleased with the picture. Then,
having scalped that half-breed renegade and standing, watching the dogs
tear him, his face unchanging, he fell backward against the tree, held
tight around the neck, Trudy holding, choking him, and crying, “No kill
him! No kill him! No kill him! No. No. No. Nickie. Nickie. Nickie!”

“What’s the matter with you?”

“No kill him.”

“I got to kill him.”

“He just a big bluff.”

“All right,” Nickie said. “I won’t kill him unless he comes around the
house. Let go of me.”

“That’s good,” Trudy said. “You want to do anything now? I feel good
now.”

“If Billy goes away.” Nick had killed Eddie Gilby, then pardoned him his
life, and he was a man now.

“You go, Billy. You hang around all the time. Go on.”

“Son a bitch,” Billy said. “I get tired this. What we come? Hunt or
what?”

“You can take the gun. There’s one shell.”

“All right. I get a big black one all right.”

“I’ll holler,” Nick said.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Then, later, it was a long time after and Billy was still away.

“You think we make a baby?” Trudy folded her brown legs together happily
and rubbed against him. Something inside Nick had gone a long way away.

“I don’t think so,” he said.

“Make plenty baby what the hell.”

They heard Billy shoot.

“I wonder if he got one.”

“Don’t care,” said Trudy.

Billy came through the trees. He had the gun over his shoulder and he
held a black squirrel by the front paws.

“Look,” he said. “Bigger than a cat. You all through?”

“Where’d you get him?”

“Over there. Saw him jump first.”

“Got to go home,” Nick said.

“No,” said Trudy.

“I got to get there for supper.”

“All right.”

“Want to hunt tomorrow?”

“All right.”

“You can have the squirrel.”

“All right.”

“Come out after supper?”

“No.”

“How you feel?”

“Good.”

“All right.”

“Give me kiss on the face,” said Trudy.

Now, as he rode along the highway in the car and it was getting dark,
Nick was all through thinking about his father. The end of the day never
made him think of him. The end of the day had always belonged to Nick
alone and he never felt right unless he was alone at it. His father came
back to him in the fall of the year, or in the early spring when there
had been jack-snipe on the prairie, or when he saw shocks of corn, or
when he saw a lake, or if he ever saw a horse and buggy, or when he saw,
or heard, wild geese, or in a duck blind; remembering the time an eagle
dropped through the whirling snow to strike a canvas-covered decoy,
rising, his wings beating, the talons caught in the canvas. His father
was with him, suddenly, in deserted orchards and in new-plowed fields,
in thickets, on small hills, or when going through dead grass, whenever
splitting wood or hauling water, by grist mills, cider mills and dams
and always with open fires. The towns he lived in were not towns his
father knew. After he was fifteen he had shared nothing with him.

His father had frost in his beard in cold weather and in hot weather he
sweated very much. He liked to work in the sun on the farm because he
did not have to and he loved manual work, which Nick did not. Nick loved
his father but hated the smell of him and once when he had to wear a
suit of his father’s underwear that had gotten too small for his father
it made him feel sick and he took it off and put it under two stones in
the creek and said that he had lost it. He had told his father how it
was when his father had made him put it on but his father had said it
was freshly washed. It had been, too. When Nick had asked him to smell
of it his father sniffed at it indignantly and said that it was clean
and fresh. When Nick came home from fishing without it and said he lost
it he was whipped for lying.

Afterwards he had sat inside the woodshed with the door open, his
shotgun loaded and cocked, looking across at his father sitting on the
screen porch reading the paper, and thought, “I can blow him to hell. I
can kill him.” Finally he felt his anger go out of him and he felt a
little sick about it being the gun that his father had given him. Then
he had gone to the Indian camp, walking there in the dark, to get rid of
the smell. There was only one person in his family that he liked the
smell of; one sister. All the others he avoided all contact with. That
sense blunted when he started to smoke. It was a good thing. It was good
for a bird dog but it did not help a man.

“What was it like, Papa, when you were a little boy and used to hunt
with the Indians?”

“I don’t know,” Nick was startled. He had not even noticed the boy was
awake. He looked at him sitting beside him on the seat. He had felt
quite alone but this boy had been with him. He wondered for how long.
“We used to go all day to hunt black squirrels,” he said. “My father
only gave me three shells a day because he said that would teach me to
hunt and it wasn’t good for a boy to go banging around. I went with a
boy named Billy Gilby and his sister Trudy. We used to go out nearly
every day all one summer.”

“Those are funny names for Indians.”

“Yes, aren’t they,” Nick said.

“But tell me what they were like.”

“They were Ojibways,” Nick said. “And they were very nice.”

“But what were they like to be with?”

“It’s hard to say,” Nick Adams said. Could you say she did first what no
one has ever done better and mention plump brown legs, flat belly, hard
little breasts, well holding arms, quick searching tongue, the flat
eyes, the good taste of mouth, then uncomfortably, tightly, sweetly,
moistly, lovely, tightly, achingly, fully, finally, unendingly,
never-endingly, never-to-endingly, suddenly ended, the great bird flown
like an owl in the twilight, only it daylight in the woods and hemlock
needles stuck against your belly. So that when you go in a place where
Indians have lived you smell them gone and all the empty pain killer
bottles and the flies that buzz do not kill the sweetgrass smell, the
smoke smell and that other like a fresh cased marten skin. Nor any jokes
about them nor old squaws take that away. Nor the sick sweet smell they
get to have. Nor what they did finally. It wasn’t how they ended. They
all ended the same. Long time ago good. Now no good.

And about the other. When you have shot one bird flying you have shot
all birds flying. They are all different and they fly in different ways
but the sensation is the same and the last one is as good as the first.
He could thank his father for that.

“You might not like them,” Nick said to the boy. “But I think you
would.”

“And my grandfather lived with them too when he was a boy, didn’t he?”

“Yes. When I asked him what they were like he said that he had many
friends among them.”

“Will I ever live with them?”

“I don’t know,” Nick said. “That’s up to you.”

“How old will I be when I get a shotgun and can hunt by myself.”

“Twelve years old if I see you are careful.”

“I wish I was twelve now.”

“You will be, soon enough.”

“What was my grandfather like? I can’t remember him except that he gave
me an air rifle and an American flag when I came over from France that
time. What was he like?”

“He’s hard to describe. He was a great hunter and fisherman and he had
wonderful eyes.”

“Was he greater than you?”

“He was a much better shot and his father was a great wing shot too.”

“I’ll bet he wasn’t better than you.”

“Oh, yes he was. He shot very quickly and beautifully. I’d rather see
him shoot than any man I ever knew. He was always very disappointed in
the way I shot.”

“Why do we never go to pray at the tomb of my grandfather?”

“We live in a different part of the country. It’s a long way from here.”

“In France that wouldn’t make any difference. In France we’d go. I think
I ought to go to pray at the tomb of my grandfather.”

“Sometime we’ll go.”

“I hope we won’t live somewhere so that I can never go to pray at your
tomb when you are dead.”

“We’ll have to arrange it.”

“Don’t you think we might all be buried at a convenient place? We could
all be buried in France. That would be fine.”

“I don’t want to be buried in France,” Nick said.

“Well, then, we’ll have to get some convenient place in America.
Couldn’t we all be buried out at the ranch?”

“That’s an idea.”

“Then I could stop and pray at the tomb of my grandfather on the way to
the ranch.”

“You’re awfully practical.”

“Well, I don’t feel good never to have even visited the tomb of my
grandfather.”

“We’ll have to go,” Nick said. “I can see we’ll have to go.”




                          Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printing errors have been silently corrected.

Inconsistencies in hyphenation, spelling and punctuation have been
preserved.

[The end of _Winner Take Nothing_ by Ernest Hemingway]
